









































Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, May 1–2, 2018


Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
May 1–2, 2018 

A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 1, 2018, at 
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 2, 2018, at 
9:00 a.m.1 

PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
John C. Williams 

James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, 
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, 
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 

James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel2 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 

Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, 
Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William 
Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate 
Economists 

Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 
Market Account 

1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 
2 Attended Tuesday session only. 

Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve 
Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 
Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division 
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of 
Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of 
Financial Stability, Board of Governors 

Margie Shanks, Deputy Secretary, Office of the 
Secretary, Board of Governors 

Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. 
Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial 
Stability, Board of Governors 

Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special 
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of 
Board Members, Board of Governors 

Eric M. Engen and Joshua Gallin, Senior Associate 
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 

Stephen A. Meyer and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior 
Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Jane E. Ihrig and David López-Salido, Associate 
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Stephanie R. Aaronson and Norman J. Morin, Assistant 
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors; Robert Vigfusson, Assistant 

3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations. 

_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 1



Director, Division of International Finance, Board 
of Governors 

 
Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 

 
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office 

of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Dana L. Burnett and Rebecca Zarutskie, Section 

Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors  

 
Marcelo Rezende, Principal Economist, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 

Bank of Minneapolis 
 
Michael Dotsey, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. 

Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Boston, and St. Louis, 
respectively 

 
Spencer Krane, Paula Tkac, and Mark L.J. Wright, 

Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Chicago, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively 

 
George A. Kahn, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank 

of Kansas City 
 
Richard K. Crump, Assistant Vice President, Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York 
 
Anthony Murphy, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, 

Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
ket Operations 
The manager of the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) provided a summary of domestic and global fi-
nancial developments over the intermeeting period.  
Broad measures of financial conditions had tightened 
somewhat in recent weeks, with U.S. equity prices lower, 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar moderately 
higher, and longer-term Treasury yields up a little.  Mar-
ket participants pointed to a range of factors contrib-
uting to the decline in stock prices, including concerns 
about the outlook for trade policy both in the United 

                                                 
4 Attended through the discussion on financial stability issues. 

States and abroad, the potential for increased regulatory 
oversight of U.S. technology companies, and incoming 
data suggesting some moderation in global economic 
growth.  The rise in nominal U.S. Treasury yields was 
associated with an increase in inflation compensation 
that, in turn, seemed to reflect a firming in inflation data 
as well as a notable rise in crude oil prices.  Judging from 
federal funds futures quotes, the expected path of the 
federal funds rate changed relatively little over the inter-
meeting period.  While term LIBOR (London interbank 
offered rates) had widened relative to comparable-
maturity OIS (overnight index swap) rates in recent 
months, the cost of dollar funding through the foreign 
exchange swap market had not risen to the same degree.  
Recent usage of standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines 
had been low, consistent with a view that the recent wid-
ening in LIBOR–OIS spreads did not reflect increased 
funding pressures or rising concerns about the condition 
of financial institutions. 

The manager discussed the role of standing liquidity 
swap lines in supporting financial stability and recom-
mended that these swap lines be renewed at this meeting 
following the usual annual schedule.  The manager also 
discussed current projections for principal payments re-
ceived from mortgage-backed securities (MBS) held in 
the SOMA.  These projections suggested that, under the 
Committee’s plan for balance sheet normalization, rein-
vestments of MBS principal would likely cease later this 
year, although the timing is uncertain.   

The deputy manager followed with a briefing focused on 
recent developments in the federal funds market, noting 
that the effective federal funds rate had increased in re-
cent weeks and had moved toward the top of the target 
range for the federal funds rate.  In large part, this devel-
opment seemed to reflect a firming in rates on repur-
chase agreements (repos) that, in turn, had resulted from 
an increase in Treasury bill issuance and the associated 
higher demands for repo financing by dealers and others.  
Higher rates had reportedly made repos a more attrac-
tive alternative investment for major lenders in the fed-
eral funds market, thus reducing the availability of fund-
ing in that market and putting some upward pressure on 
the federal funds rate.  While some of the recent pressure 
on the federal funds rate could be expected to fade over 
coming weeks as the market adjusts to higher levels of 
Treasury bills, the gradual normalization of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet and the accompanying decline in 

Page 2                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



reserves was anticipated to continue putting some up-
ward pressure on the federal funds rate relative to the 
interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. 

The deputy manager then discussed the possibility of a 
small technical realignment of the IOER rate relative to 
the top of the target range for the federal funds rate.  
Since the target range was established in December 
2008, the IOER rate has been set at the top of the target 
range to help keep the effective federal funds rate within 
the range.  Lately the spread of the IOER rate over the 
effective federal funds rate had narrowed to only 5 basis 
points.  A technical adjustment of the IOER rate to a 
level 5 basis points below the top of the target range 
could keep the effective federal funds rate well within 
the target range.  This could be accomplished by imple-
menting a 20 basis point increase in the IOER rate at a 
time when the Committee raised the target range for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points.  Alternatively, the 
IOER rate could be lowered 5 basis points at a meeting 
in which the Committee left the target range for the fed-
eral funds rate unchanged. 

In their discussion of this issue, participants generally 
agreed that it could become appropriate to make a small 
technical adjustment in the Federal Reserve’s approach 
to implementing monetary policy by setting the IOER 
rate modestly below the top of the target range for the 
federal funds rate.  Such an adjustment would be con-
sistent with the Committee’s statement in the Policy 
Normalization Principles and Plans that it would be pre-
pared to adjust the details of the approach to policy im-
plementation during the period of normalization in light 
of economic and financial developments.  Many partici-
pants judged that it would be useful to make such a tech-
nical adjustment sooner rather than later.  Participants 
generally agreed that it would be desirable to make that 
adjustment at a time when the FOMC decided to in-
crease the target range for the federal funds rate; that 
timing would simplify FOMC communications and em-
phasize that the IOER rate is a helpful tool for imple-
menting the FOMC’s policy decisions but does not, in 
itself, convey the stance of policy.  While additional tech-
nical adjustments in the IOER rate could become nec-
essary over time, these were not expected to be frequent.  
A number of participants also suggested that, before too 
long, the Committee might want to further discuss how 
it can implement monetary policy most effectively and 
efficiently when the quantity of reserve balances reaches 
a level appreciably below that seen in recent years. 

The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip-
rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada 

and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ-
ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the 
North American Framework Agreement of 1994.  In ad-
dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the 
dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements 
with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank 
of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na-
tional Bank.  The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s 
participation in these standing arrangements are taken 
annually at the April or May FOMC meeting. 

By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open 
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-
ing period.  There were no intervention operations in 
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the 
intermeeting period. 

Staff Review of the Economic Situation 
The information reviewed for the May 1–2 meeting in-
dicated that labor market conditions continued to 
strengthen in the first quarter, while real gross domestic 
product (GDP) rose at a moderate pace.  Consumer 
price inflation, as measured by the 12‐month percentage 
change in the price index for personal consumption ex-
penditures (PCE), was 2 percent in March.  Survey‐
based measures of longer-run inflation expectations 
were, on balance, little changed. 

Total nonfarm payroll employment rose less in March 
than in the previous two months, but the increase for 
the first quarter as a whole was solid.  The labor force 
participation rate edged down in March but moved up a 
little, on net, in the first quarter.  The national unemploy-
ment rate remained at 4.1 percent for a sixth consecutive 
month.  Similarly, the unemployment rates for African 
Americans, Asians, and Hispanics were roughly flat, on 
balance, in recent months.  The share of workers em-
ployed part time for economic reasons was little changed 
at a rate close to that prevailing before the previous re-
cession.  The rate of private-sector job openings stayed 
at an elevated level in February, the rate of quits re-
mained high, and initial claims for unemployment insur-
ance benefits continued to be low through mid-April.  
Recent readings showed that increases in labor compen-
sation stepped up modestly over the past year.  The em-
ployment cost index for private workers rose 2.8 percent 
over the 12 months ending in March, and average hourly 
earnings for all employees increased 2.7 percent over 
that period.  Both increases were larger than those re-
ported for the 12 months ending in March 2017. 

Total industrial production increased in March and rose 
at a solid pace for the first quarter as a whole, with gains 

Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3



in the output of manufacturers, mines, and utilities.  Au-
tomakers’ schedules suggested that assemblies of light 
motor vehicles would edge down in the second quarter 
from the average pace in the first quarter, but broader 
indicators of manufacturing production, such as the new 
orders indexes from national and regional manufactur-
ing surveys, continued to point to further gains in factory 
output in the near term. 

Consumer expenditures rose at a modest pace in the first 
quarter following a strong gain in the preceding quarter.  
Monthly data pointed to some improvement toward the 
end of the quarter, as real PCE moved up in March after 
declining in January and February.  However, the recent 
movements might have partly reflected the effects of a 
delay in many federal tax refunds, which could have 
shifted some consumer spending from February to 
March.  Light motor vehicle sales stepped down in the 
first quarter after a strong fourth-quarter pace that was 
partly boosted by replacement sales following the fall 
hurricanes; sales declined in April, but indicators of ve-
hicle demand remained upbeat.  More broadly, key fac-
tors that influence consumer spending—including gains 
in employment and real disposable personal income, 
along with households’ elevated net worth—should con-
tinue to support solid real PCE growth in the near term.  
In addition, the lower tax withholding resulting from the 
tax cuts enacted late last year was likely to provide some 
impetus to spending in coming months.  Consumer sen-
timent, as measured by the University of Michigan Sur-
veys of Consumers, remained elevated in April. 

Real residential investment was unchanged in the first 
quarter after a strong increase in the fourth quarter.  
Starts for new single-family homes decreased in March, 
but the average pace in the first quarter was little 
changed from the fourth quarter.  In contrast, starts of 
multifamily units moved up in March after contracting 
in February, and they were higher in the first quarter 
than in the fourth.  Sales of both new and existing homes 
increased in February and March. 

Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
tellectual property increased at a moderate pace in the 
first quarter after rising briskly in the second half of last 
year.  Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods 
excluding aircraft edged down in March.  However,  
forward-looking indicators of business equipment 
spending—such as the backlog of unfilled capital goods 
orders, along with upbeat readings on business senti-
ment from national and regional surveys—continued to 
point to robust gains in equipment spending in the near 
term.  Real business expenditures for nonresidential 

structures rose at a robust pace in the first quarter, and 
the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in opera-
tion—an indicator of business spending for structures in 
the drilling and mining sector—continued to move up 
through mid-April. 

Total real government purchases rose at a slower rate in 
the first quarter than in the fourth quarter.  Real federal 
purchases increased in the first quarter, with gains in 
both defense and nondefense spending.  Real purchases 
by state and local governments also moved higher; state 
and local government payrolls were unchanged in the 
first quarter, but nominal construction spending by these 
governments rose somewhat. 

The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in 
February as imports rose briskly, outpacing the increase 
in exports.  Preliminary data on trade in goods suggested 
that the trade deficit narrowed sharply in March, with 
exports continuing to grow robustly but imports retrac-
ing earlier gains.  The Bureau of Economic Analysis es-
timated that the change in real net exports added slightly 
to growth of real GDP in the first quarter. 

Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE 
price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months end-
ing in March.  Core PCE price inflation, which excludes 
changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 
1.9 percent over that same period.  The consumer price 
index (CPI) rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending 
in March, while core CPI inflation was 2.1 percent.  Re-
cent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run 
inflation expectations—including those from the Michi-
gan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and 
the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of 
Market Participants—were little changed on balance. 

Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity 
continued to expand at a solid pace.  Real GDP growth 
picked up in the first quarter in several emerging market 
economies (EMEs), including Mexico, China, and some 
other parts of emerging Asia.  However, incoming data 
in a number of advanced foreign economies (AFEs)—
in particular, real GDP in the United Kingdom—
showed somewhat slower growth than market partici-
pants were expecting, partly because of transitory factors 
such as severe weather.  Overall, inflation in most AFEs 
and EMEs continued to be subdued, increasing in the 
AFEs in the first quarter on higher energy prices but 

Page 4                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



stepping down some in the EMEs, partly reflecting 
lower food prices in some Asian economies. 

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Early in the intermeeting period, uncertainty over trade 
policy and negative news about the technology sector re-
portedly contributed to lower prices for risky assets, but 
these concerns subsequently seemed to recede amid 
stronger-than-expected corporate earnings reports.  Eq-
uity prices declined, nominal Treasury yields increased 
modestly, and market-based measures of inflation com-
pensation ticked up on net.  Meanwhile, financing con-
ditions for nonfinancial businesses and households 
largely remained supportive of spending. 

FOMC communications over the intermeeting period 
were generally viewed by market participants as reflect-
ing an upbeat outlook for economic growth and as con-
sistent with a continued gradual removal of monetary 
policy accommodation.  The FOMC’s decision to raise 
the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
at the March meeting was widely anticipated.  Market re-
action to the release of the March FOMC minutes later 
in the intermeeting period was minimal.  The probability 
of an increase in the target range for the federal funds 
rate occurring at the May FOMC meeting, as implied by 
quotes on federal funds futures contracts, remained 
close to zero; the probability of an increase at the June 
FOMC meeting rose to about 90 percent by the end of 
the intermeeting period.  Expected levels of the federal 
funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020 implied by OIS 
rates rose modestly. 

The nominal Treasury yield curve continued to flatten 
over the intermeeting period, with yields on 2-year and 
10-year Treasury securities up 17 basis points and 7 basis 
points, respectively.  Measures of inflation compensa-
tion derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-
ties increased 4 basis points and 7 basis points at the 
5- and 5-to-10-year horizons, respectively, against a 
backdrop of rising oil prices.  Option-implied measures 
of volatility of longer-term interest rates continued to 
decline over the intermeeting period after their marked 
increase earlier this year. 

The S&P 500 index decreased over the period on net.  
Equity prices declined early in the intermeeting period, 
reportedly in response to trade tensions between the 
United States and China as well as negative news about 
the technology sector.  However, equity prices subse-
quently retraced some of the earlier declines as concerns 
about trade policy seemed to ease and corporate earn-
ings reports for the first quarter of 2018 generally came 
in stronger than expected.  Option-implied volatility on 

the S&P 500 index at the one-month horizon—the 
VIX—declined but remained at elevated levels relative 
to 2017, ending the period at approximately 15 percent.  
On net, spreads of yields of investment-grade corporate 
bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities 
widened a bit, while spreads for speculative-grade cor-
porate bonds were unchanged. 

Conditions in short-term funding markets remained 
generally stable over the intermeeting period. Spreads on 
term money market instruments relative to comparable-
maturity OIS rates were still larger than usual in some 
segments of the money market.  Reflecting the FOMC’s 
policy action in March, yields on a broad set of money 
market instruments moved about 25 basis points higher.  
Bill yields also stayed high relative to OIS rates as cumu-
lative Treasury bill supply remained elevated.  Money 
market dynamics over quarter-end were muted relative 
to previous quarter-ends. 

Foreign equity markets were mixed over the intermeet-
ing period, with investors attuned to developments re-
lated to U.S. and Chinese trade policies and to news 
about the U.S. technology sector.  Broad Japanese and 
European equity indexes outperformed their U.S. coun-
terparts, ending the period somewhat higher.  Market-
based measures of policy expectations and longer-term 
yields were little changed in the euro area and Japan but 
declined modestly in the United Kingdom on weaker-
than-expected economic data.  Longer-term yields in 
Canada moved up moderately amid notably higher oil 
prices.  In EMEs, sovereign bond spreads edged up; cap-
ital continued to flow into EME mutual funds, although 
at a slower pace lately. 

On net, the broad nominal dollar index appreciated 
moderately over the intermeeting period.  In the early 
part of the period, the index depreciated slightly, as rela-
tively positive news about the current round of NAFTA 
(North American Free Trade Agreement) negotiations 
led to appreciation of the Mexican peso and Canadian 
dollar, two currencies with large weights in the index.  
Later in the period, there was a broad-based appreciation 
of the dollar against most currencies as U.S. yields in-
creased relative to those in AFEs and as the Mexican 
peso declined amid uncertainty associated with the up-
coming presidential elections. 

Growth in banks’ commercial and industrial (C&I) loans 
strengthened in March and the first half of April follow-
ing relatively weak growth in January and February.  Re-
spondents to the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion 
Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported 
that their institutions had eased standards and terms on 

Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5



C&I loans in the first quarter, most often citing in-
creased competition from other lenders as the reason for 
doing so.  Gross issuance of corporate bonds and lever-
aged loans was strong in March, and equity issuance was 
robust.  The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations 
was stable over the intermeeting period, and the ratio of 
aggregate debt to assets remained near multidecade 
highs. 

Commercial real estate (CRE) financing conditions re-
mained accommodative over the intermeeting period.  
CRE loan growth at banks strengthened in March but 
edged down in the first half of April.  Spreads on com-
mercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) were little 
changed over the intermeeting period and remained near 
their post-crisis lows.  CMBS issuance continued to be 
strong in March but slowed somewhat in April.  Re-
spondents to the April SLOOS reported easing stan-
dards on nonfarm nonresidential loans and tightening 
standards on multifamily loans, whereas standards on 
construction and land development loans were little 
changed in the first quarter.  Meanwhile, respondents in-
dicated weaker demand for loans across these three CRE 
loan categories. 

Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market 
remained accommodative for most borrowers in March 
and April.  For borrowers with low credit scores, condi-
tions continued to ease, but credit remained relatively 
tight and the volume of mortgage loans extended to this 
group remained low.  Banks responding to the April 
SLOOS reported weaker loan demand across most resi-
dential real estate (RRE) loan categories, while standards 
were reportedly about unchanged for most RRE loan 
types in the first quarter. 

Consumer credit growth moderated in March and the 
first half of April.  Respondents to the April SLOOS re-
ported that standards and terms on auto and credit card 
loans tightened, and that demand for these loans weak-
ened in the first quarter.  On balance, credit remained 
readily available to prime-rated borrowers, but tight for 
subprime borrowers, over the intermeeting period. 

The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to 
financial stability; the report again characterized the fi-
nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as 
moderate on balance.  This overall assessment incorpo-
rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated 
with asset valuation pressures, while having come down 
a little in recent months, nonetheless continued to be el-
evated.  The staff judged vulnerabilities from financial-
sector leverage and maturity and liquidity transformation 

to be low, vulnerabilities from household leverage as be-
ing in the low-to-moderate range, and vulnerabilities 
from leverage in the nonfinancial business sector as ele-
vated.  The staff also characterized overall vulnerabilities 
to foreign financial stability as moderate while highlight-
ing specific issues in some foreign economies, includ-
ing—depending on the country—elevated asset valua-
tion pressures, high private or sovereign debt burdens, 
and political uncertainties. 

Staff Economic Outlook 
The staff projection for U.S. economic activity prepared 
for the May FOMC meeting continued to suggest that 
the economy was expanding at an above-trend pace.  
Real GDP growth, which slowed in the first quarter, was 
expected to pick up in the second quarter and to outpace 
potential output growth through 2020.  The unemploy-
ment rate was projected to decline further over the next 
few years and to continue to run below the staff’s esti-
mate of its longer-run natural rate over this period.  Rel-
ative to the forecast prepared for the March meeting, the 
projection for real GDP growth in 2018 was revised 
down a little, primarily in response to incoming con-
sumer spending data that were somewhat softer than the 
staff had expected.  Beyond 2018, the projection for 
GDP growth was essentially unrevised.  With real GDP 
rising a little less, on balance, over the forecast period, 
the projected decline in the unemployment rate over the 
next few years was also a touch smaller than in the pre-
vious forecast. 

The near-term projection for consumer price inflation 
was revised up slightly in response to incoming data on 
prices.  Beyond the near term, the forecast for inflation 
was a bit lower than in the previous projection, reflecting 
the slightly higher unemployment rate in the new fore-
cast.  The rates of both total and core PCE price infla-
tion were projected to be faster in 2018 than in 2017.  
The staff projected that total PCE inflation would be 
near the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the next 
several years.  Total PCE inflation was expected to run 
slightly below core inflation in 2019 and 2020 because of 
a projected decline in energy prices. 

The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections 
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years.  The 
staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth 
and the unemployment rate as balanced.  On the upside, 
recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex-
pansion in economic activity over the next few years 
than the staff projected.  On the downside, those fiscal 
policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy 

Page 6                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



than the staff expected if the economy was already op-
erating above its potential level and resource utilization 
continued to tighten, as the staff projected.  Risks to the 
inflation projection also were seen as balanced.  An up-
side risk was that inflation could increase more than ex-
pected in an economy that was projected to move fur-
ther above its potential.  Downside risks included the 
possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may 
be lower than was assumed or that the run of low core 
inflation readings last year could prove to be more per-
sistent than the staff expected. 

Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the 
Economic Outlook 
In their discussion of the economic situation and the 
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information 
received since the FOMC met in March indicated that 
the labor market had continued to strengthen and that 
economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate.  Job 
gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and 
the unemployment rate had stayed low.  Recent data sug-
gested that growth of household spending had moder-
ated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business 
fixed investment had continued to grow strongly.  On a 
12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for 
items other than food and energy had moved close to 
2 percent.  Market-based measures of inflation compen-
sation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-
term inflation expectations were little changed, on bal-
ance. 

Participants viewed recent readings on spending, em-
ployment, and inflation as suggesting little change, on 
balance, in their assessments of the economic outlook.  
Real GDP growth slowed somewhat less in the first 
quarter than anticipated at the time of the March meet-
ing, and participants expected that the moderation in the 
growth of consumer spending early in the year would 
prove temporary.  They noted a number of economic 
fundamentals were currently supporting continued 
above-trend economic growth; these included a strong 
labor market, federal tax and spending policies, high lev-
els of household and business confidence, favorable fi-
nancial conditions, and strong economic growth abroad.  
Participants generally expected that further gradual in-
creases in the target range for the federal funds rate 
would be consistent with solid expansion of economic 
activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation 
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective 
over the medium term.  Participants generally viewed the 
risks to the economic outlook to be roughly balanced. 

Participants generally reported that their business con-
tacts were optimistic about the economic outlook.  
However, in a number of Districts, contacts expressed 
concern about the possible adverse effects of tariffs and 
trade restrictions, including the potential for postponing 
or pulling back on capital spending.  Labor markets were 
generally strong, and contacts in a number of Districts 
reported shortages of workers in specific industries or 
occupations. In some cases, labor shortages were con-
tributing to upward pressure on wages.  In many Dis-
tricts, business contacts experienced rising costs of 
nonlabor inputs, particularly trucking, rail, and shipping 
rates and prices of steel, aluminum, lumber, and 
petroleum-based commodities.  Reports on the ability of 
firms to pass through higher costs to customers varied 
across Districts.  Activity in the energy sector remained 
strong, and crude oil production was expected to con-
tinue to expand in response to rising global demand.  In 
contrast, in agricultural areas, low crop prices continued 
to weigh on farm income.  It was noted that the potential 
for higher Chinese tariffs on key agricultural products 
could, in the longer run, hurt U.S. competitiveness. 

Participants generally agreed that labor market condi-
tions strengthened further during the first quarter of the 
year.  Nonfarm payroll employment posted strong gains, 
averaging 200,000 per month.  The unemployment rate 
was unchanged, but at a level below most estimates of 
its longer-run normal rate.  Both the overall labor force 
participation rate and the employment-to-population ra-
tio moved up.  The first-quarter data from the employ-
ment cost index indicated that the strength in the labor 
market was showing through to a gradual pickup in wage 
increases, although the signal from other wage measures 
was less clear.  Many participants commented that over-
all wage pressures were still moderate or were strong 
only in industries and occupations experiencing very 
tight labor supply; several of them noted that recent 
wage developments provided little evidence of general 
overheating in the labor market.  With economic growth 
anticipated to remain above trend, participants generally 
expected the unemployment rate to remain below, or to 
decline further below, their estimates of its longer-run 
normal rate.  Several participants also saw scope for a 
strong labor market to continue to draw individuals into 
the workforce.  However, a few others questioned 
whether tight labor markets would have a lasting positive 
effect on labor force participation. 

The 12-month changes in overall and core PCE prices 
moved up in March, to 2 percent and 1.9 percent, re-
spectively.  Most participants viewed the recent firming 
in inflation as providing some reassurance that inflation 

Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 7



was on a trajectory to achieve the Committee’s symmet-
ric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis.  In particular, 
the recent readings appeared to support the view that the 
downside surprises last year were largely transitory.  
Some participants noted that inflation was likely to mod-
estly overshoot 2 percent for a time.  However, several 
participants suggested that the underlying trend in infla-
tion had changed little, noting that some of the recent 
increase in inflation may have represented transitory 
price changes in some categories of health care and fi-
nancial services, or that various measures of underlying 
inflation, such as the 12-month trimmed mean PCE in-
flation rate from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, re-
mained relatively stable at levels below 2 percent.  In dis-
cussing the outlook for inflation, many participants em-
phasized that, after an extended period of low inflation, 
the Committee’s longer-run policy objective was to re-
turn inflation to its symmetric 2 percent goal on a sus-
tained basis.  Many saw tight resource utilization, the 
pickup in wage increases and nonlabor input costs, and 
stable inflation expectations as supporting their projec-
tions that inflation would remain near 2 percent over the 
medium term.  But a few cautioned that, although 
market-based measures of inflation compensation had 
moved up over recent months, in their view these 
measures, as well as some survey-based measures, re-
mained at levels somewhat below those that would be 
consistent with an expectation of sustained 2 percent in-
flation as measured by the PCE price index. 

Participants commented on a number of risks and un-
certainties associated with their expectations for eco-
nomic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the 
medium term.  Some participants saw a risk that, as re-
source utilization continued to tighten, supply con-
straints could develop that would intensify upward wage 
and price pressures, or that financial imbalances could 
emerge, which could eventually erode the sustainability 
of the economic expansion.  Alternatively, some partici-
pants thought that a strengthening labor market could 
bring a further increase in labor supply, allowing the un-
employment rate to decline further with less upward 
pressure on wages and prices.  Another area of uncer-
tainty was the outlook for fiscal and trade policies.  Sev-
eral participants continued to note the challenge of as-
sessing the timing and magnitude of the effects of recent 
fiscal policy changes on household and business spend-
ing and on labor supply over the next several years.  In 
addition, they saw the trajectory of fiscal policy thereaf-
ter as difficult to forecast.  With regard to trade policies, 
a number of participants viewed the range of possible 

outcomes for economic activity and inflation to be par-
ticularly wide, depending on what actions were taken by 
the United States and how U.S trading partners re-
sponded.  And some participants observed that while 
these policies were being debated and negotiations con-
tinued, the uncertainty surrounding trade issues could 
damp business sentiment and spending.  In their discus-
sion of the outlook for inflation, a few participants also 
noted the risk that, if global oil prices remained high or 
moved higher, U.S. inflation would be boosted by the 
direct effects and pass-through of higher energy costs. 

Financial conditions tightened somewhat over the inter-
meeting period but remained accommodative overall.  
The foreign exchange value of the dollar rose modestly, 
but this move retraced only a bit of the depreciation of 
the dollar since its 2016 peak.  With their decline over 
the intermeeting period, equity prices were about un-
changed, on net, since the beginning of the year but were 
still near their historical highs.  Longer-term Treasury 
yields rose, but somewhat less than shorter-term yields, 
and the yield curve flattened somewhat further. 

In commenting on the staff’s assessment of financial sta-
bility, a couple of participants noted that after the bout 
of financial market volatility in early February, the use of 
investment strategies predicated on a low-volatility envi-
ronment may have become less prevalent, and that some 
investors may have become more cautious.  However, 
asset valuations across a range of markets and leverage 
in the nonfinancial corporate sector remained elevated 
relative to historical norms, leaving some borrowers vul-
nerable to unexpected negative shocks.  With regard to 
the ability of the financial system to absorb such shocks, 
several participants commented that regulatory reforms 
since the crisis had contributed to appreciably stronger 
capital and liquidity positions in the financial sector.  In 
this context, a few participants emphasized the need to 
build additional resilience in the financial sector at this 
point in the economic expansion. 

In their consideration of monetary policy over the near 
term, participants discussed the implications of recent 
economic and financial developments for the outlook 
for economic growth, labor market conditions, and in-
flation and, in turn, for the appropriate path of the fed-
eral funds rate.  All participants expressed the view that 
it would be appropriate for the Committee to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at the 
May meeting.  Participants concurred that information 
received during the intermeeting period had not materi-
ally altered their assessment of the outlook for the econ-
omy.  Participants commented that above-trend growth 

Page 8                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



in real GDP in recent quarters, together with somewhat 
higher recent inflation readings, had increased their con-
fidence that inflation on a 12-month basis would con-
tinue to run near the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent 
symmetric objective.  That said, it was noted that it was 
premature to conclude that inflation would remain at 
levels around 2 percent, especially after several years in 
which inflation had persistently run below the Commit-
tee’s 2 percent objective.  In light of subdued inflation 
over recent years, a few participants observed that ad-
justments in the stance of policy should take account of 
the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations 
have drifted a bit below levels consistent with the Com-
mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective.  Most participants 
judged that if incoming information broadly confirmed 
their current economic outlook, it would likely soon be 
appropriate for the Committee to take another step in 
removing policy accommodation.  Overall, participants 
agreed that the current stance of monetary policy re-
mained accommodative, supporting strong labor market 
conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation on a sus-
tained basis. 

With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary 
policy, all participants reaffirmed that adjustments to the 
path for the policy rate would depend on their assess-
ments of the evolution of the economic outlook and 
risks to the outlook relative to the Committee’s statutory 
objectives.  Participants generally agreed with the assess-
ment that continuing to raise the target range for the fed-
eral funds rate gradually would likely be appropriate if 
the economy evolves about as expected.  These partici-
pants commented that this gradual approach was most 
likely to be conducive to maintaining strong labor mar-
ket conditions and achieving the symmetric 2 percent in-
flation objective on a sustained basis without resulting in 
conditions that would eventually require an abrupt pol-
icy tightening.  A few participants commented that re-
cent news on inflation, against a background of contin-
ued prospects for a solid pace of economic growth, sup-
ported the view that inflation on a 12-month basis would 
likely move slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
jective for a time.  It was also noted that a temporary 
period of inflation modestly above 2 percent would be 
consistent with the Committee’s symmetric inflation ob-
jective and could be helpful in anchoring longer-run in-
flation expectations at a level consistent with that objec-
tive.   

Meeting participants also discussed the recent flatter 
profile of the term structure of interest rates. Partici-
pants pointed to a number of factors contributing to the 

flattening of the yield curve, including the expected grad-
ual rise of the federal funds rate, the downward pressure 
on term premiums from the Federal Reserve’s still-large 
balance sheet as well as asset purchase programs by 
other central banks, and a reduction in investors’ esti-
mates of the longer-run neutral real interest rate.  A few 
participants noted that such factors could make the 
slope of the yield curve a less reliable signal of future 
economic activity.  However, several participants 
thought that it would be important to continue to mon-
itor the slope of the yield curve, emphasizing the histor-
ical regularity that an inverted yield curve has indicated 
an increased risk of recession. 

Participants commented on how the Committee’s com-
munications in its postmeeting statement might need to 
be revised in coming meetings if the economy evolved 
broadly as expected.  A few participants noted that if in-
creases in the target range for the federal funds rate con-
tinued, the federal funds rate could be at or above their 
estimates of its longer-run normal level before too long.  
In addition, a few observed that the neutral level of the 
federal funds rate might currently be lower than their es-
timates of its longer-run level.  In light of this, some par-
ticipants noted it might soon be appropriate to revise the 
forward-guidance language in the statement indicating 
that the “federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some 
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the 
longer run” or to modify the language stating that “the 
stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.”  
Participants expressed a range of views on the amount 
of further policy firming that would likely be required 
over the medium term to achieve the Committee’s goals.  
Participants indicated that the Committee, in making 
policy decisions over the next few years, should conduct 
policy with the aim of keeping inflation near its longer-
run symmetric objective while sustaining the economic 
expansion and a strong labor market.  Participants 
agreed that the actual path of the federal funds rate 
would depend on the economic outlook as informed by 
incoming information. 

Committee Policy Action 
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period 
ahead, members judged that information received since 
the Committee met in March indicated that the labor 
market had continued to strengthen and that economic 
activity had been rising at a moderate rate.  Job gains had 
been strong, on average, in recent months, and the un-
employment rate had stayed low.  Recent data suggested 
that growth of household spending had moderated from 
its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business fixed in-
vestment continued to grow strongly.  On a 12-month 

Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 9



basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other 
than food and energy had moved close to 2 percent.  In 
particular, in March the 12-month percent increase in 
PCE prices was equal to the Committee’s longer-run ob-
jective of 2 percent, while the measure excluding food 
and energy prices was only slightly below 2 percent.  
Market-based measures of inflation compensation re-
mained low, and survey-based measures of longer-term 
inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. 

All members viewed the recent data as indicating that 
the outlook for the economy had changed little since the 
previous meeting.  In addition, financial conditions, al-
though somewhat tighter than at the time of the March 
FOMC meeting, had stayed accommodative overall, 
while fiscal policy was likely to provide sizable impetus 
to the economy over the next few years.  Consequently, 
members expected that, with further gradual adjust-
ments to the stance of monetary policy, economic activ-
ity would expand at a moderate pace in the medium term 
and labor market conditions would remain strong.  
Members agreed that inflation on a 12-month basis is 
expected to run near the Committee’s symmetric 2 per-
cent objective over the medium term.  Members judged 
that the risks to the economic outlook appeared to be 
roughly balanced. 

After assessing current conditions and the outlook for 
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
bers agreed to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent.  They noted that the 
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, 
thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor 
market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent in-
flation. 

Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate 
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s 
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
flation.  They reiterated that this assessment would take 
into account a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla-
tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings 
on financial and international developments.  Members 
also agreed that they would carefully monitor actual and 
expected developments in inflation in relation to the 
Committee’s symmetric inflation goal.  Members ex-
pected that economic conditions would evolve in a man-
ner that would warrant further gradual increases in the 
federal funds rate.  Members agreed that the federal 
funds rate was likely to remain, for some time, below 

levels that they expected to prevail in the longer run.  
However, they noted that the actual path of the federal 
funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as 
informed by incoming data. 

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee 
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the 
following domestic policy directive, to be released at 
2:00 p.m.: 

“Effective May 3, 2018, the Federal Open Mar-
ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake 
open market operations as necessary to main-
tain the federal funds rate in a target range of 
1½ to 1¾ percent, including overnight reverse 
repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase 
operations with maturities of more than one day 
when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
ing rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts limited only 
by the value of Treasury securities held outright 
in the System Open Market Account that are 
available for such operations and by a per-
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. 

The Committee directs the Desk to continue 
rolling over at auction the amount of principal 
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings 
of Treasury securities maturing during each cal-
endar month that exceeds $18 billion, and to re-
invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the 
amount of principal payments from the Federal 
Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed securities received during 
each calendar month that exceeds $12 billion.  
Small deviations from these amounts for oper-
ational reasons are acceptable. 

The Committee also directs the Desk to engage 
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as 
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal 
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities 
transactions.” 

The vote also encompassed approval of the statement 
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: 

“Information received since the Federal Open 
Market Committee met in March indicates that 
the labor market has continued to strengthen 
and that economic activity has been rising at a 
moderate rate.  Job gains have been strong, on 

Page 10                                                                                                                                                                              _Federal Open Market Committee



average, in recent months, and the unemploy-
ment rate has stayed low.  Recent data suggest 
that growth of household spending moderated 
from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while busi-
ness fixed investment continued to grow 
strongly.  On a 12-month basis, both overall in-
flation and inflation for items other than food 
and energy have moved close to 2 percent.  
Market-based measures of inflation compensa-
tion remain low; survey-based measures of 
longer-term inflation expectations are little 
changed, on balance. 

Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment 
and price stability.  The Committee expects that, 
with further gradual adjustments in the stance 
of monetary policy, economic activity will ex-
pand at a moderate pace in the medium term 
and labor market conditions will remain strong.  
Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to run 
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob-
jective over the medium term.  Risks to the eco-
nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. 

In view of realized and expected labor market 
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent.  The stance of 
monetary policy remains accommodative, 
thereby supporting strong labor market condi-
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla-
tion. 

In determining the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal 
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized 
and expected economic conditions relative to its 
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
cent inflation.  This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including 
measures of labor market conditions, indicators 
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, 

and readings on financial and international de-
velopments.  The Committee will carefully 
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.  
The Committee expects that economic condi-
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant 
further gradual increases in the federal funds 
rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for 
some time, below levels that are expected to 
prevail in the longer run.  However, the actual 
path of the federal funds rate will depend on the 
economic outlook as informed by incoming 
data.” 

Voting for this action:  Jerome H. Powell, William C. 
Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael 
Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John 
C. Williams. 

Voting against this action:  None. 

Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the 
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
changed at 1¾ percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount 
rate) at the existing level of 2¼ percent.5 

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee 
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 12–13, 
2018.  The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on May 2, 
2018. 

Notation Vote 
By notation vote completed on April 10, 2018, the Com-
mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
mittee meeting held on March 20–21, 2018. 

 
 
 

_____________________________ 
James A. Clouse 

Secretary
 

 

                                                 
5 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of 
the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea-
sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such 
rates. 

Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_                                                                                                                                                                              Page 11




