FRB: FOMC Minutes--December 21, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of December 21, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 21, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn,1 Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Kansas City, Richmond, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Ms. Meulendyke and Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
St. Louis, respectively
1. Attended part of the meeting.
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee held on November 16, 1993, were
approved.
By unanimous vote, responsibility for making decisions on
appeals of denials by the Secretary of the Committee for access to
Committee records was delegated under the provisions of 271.4(d) of
the Committee's Rules regarding Availability of Information to Mr.
Mullins and, in his absence, to Ms. Phillips.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets during the period since the November
meeting. There were no System open market transactions in foreign
currencies during this period, and thus no vote was required of the
Committee.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period November 16, 1993, through December 20, 1993. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
and financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over
the intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and
financial information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity had recorded a strong advance in recent months.
Consumer spending had picked up, and business purchases of durable
equipment had remained on a marked upward trend. Residential
construction was rising rapidly, and nonresidential construction had
turned up from depressed levels. Industrial production had been
boosted by developments in the motor vehicle industry, and employment
had continued to post solid gains. Most indexes of prices pointed to
little change in inflation trends despite the recent acceleration of
economic activity.
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose appreciably further in
November. Another substantial increase in jobs was recorded in the
services industries, notably in health and business services.
Construction employment was up significantly further after registering
modest gains on balance over the first three quarters of 1993. In
manufacturing, there were back-to-back increases in jobs in October
and November following seven consecutive monthly declines, and both
overtime hours and the average workweek remained at a high level.
Most of the November expansion in factory jobs occurred in the motor
vehicle and capital goods industries. The civilian unemployment rate
fell considerably in November, to 6.4 percent.
Industrial production increased sharply in October and
November. Manufacturing accounted for all the gain over the two
months, with the rise partly reflecting a continuing rebound in the
production of motor vehicles and parts. Elsewhere in manufacturing,
strong advances were recorded in the output of computers and non-auto
durable consumer goods. The sharp expansion in production was
associated with substantial increases in the rate of utilization of
industrial capacity in October and November.
Retail sales were up moderately in November after a large
advance in October. Motor vehicle sales surged in October and
remained at the higher level in November, apparently reflecting in
part favorable financing terms, small price increases--adjusted for
quality improvements--on 1994 models, and generous incentives on
pickup trucks from some manufacturers. Sales of apparel, furniture
and appliances, and other durable goods also were strong on balance
over October and November. Housing starts rose substantially in
November; starts of single-family units reached their highest level
since early 1987, but starts of multifamily units edged lower. Sales
of both new and existing homes remained robust in October.
Business spending for durable equipment apparently continued
to rise rapidly. Among nondefense capital goods other than aircraft,
shipments of computers and other durable equipment were significantly
higher in October than in the third quarter. In addition, the demand
for heavy trucks remained strong, and the brisk sales of light
vehicles in October and November likely were the result in part of a
step-up in spending by businesses. Nonresidential construction
activity increased again in October: Office building declined further
and industrial construction retraced part of a sizable September gain,
but outlays for institutional, public utilities, and non-office
commercial structures continued to move higher.
Business inventories were little changed in October, with
reductions in manufacturing and wholesale stocks nearly offsetting
increases at the retail level. A moderate further decline in
manufacturers' inventories in October was concentrated among producers
of aircraft and parts, where stocks have been contracting for more
than two years; the stocks-to-shipments ratio for manufacturing as a
whole fell to its lowest level in recent years. In the wholesale
sector, inventories declined in October after changing little in
September, and the ratio of inventories to sales remained in the
middle of its range over the past several years. At the retail level,
stocks increased considerably further; with sales expanding
vigorously, however, the ratio of stocks to sales edged lower and this
ratio also was in the middle of its range over the past several years.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit for October was
about unchanged from its September level and its average rate for the
third quarter. The value of both exports and imports increased in
October. Exports of automotive products rose strongly, and exports of
aircraft rebounded from a September downturn. The advance in imports
was spread across all major categories. Economic activity in the
major foreign industrial countries expanded moderately in the third
quarter; however, available data suggested that output in Japan and
Germany might decline in the current quarter, with a depressing effect
on growth for these industrial countries as a group.
Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices pointed to
little change in inflation trends, although prices of some commodities
and industrial materials had firmed recently. Producer prices of
finished goods were unchanged in November after declining in October
and over the third quarter. In November, a large drop in the prices
of finished energy goods offset a rebound in the prices of other
finished goods. Producer prices for nonfood, non-energy finished
goods were about unchanged over the twelve months ended in November.
At the consumer level, prices of items other than food and energy
advanced moderately in November; the twelve-month increase in this
price measure was a little smaller than the rise over the comparable
period ended in November 1992. Average hourly earnings edged up in
November; for the twelve months ended in November, these earnings were
up by a smaller amount than over the preceding year.
At its meeting on November 16, 1993, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and
M3 over coming months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged somewhat less
than anticipated levels, reflecting very light amounts of adjustment
borrowing over most of the period, and the federal funds rate remained
close to 3 percent.
While most short-term interest rates changed little over the
intermeeting period, signs of stronger economic growth and the firming
of some commodity prices tended to push up longer-term interest rates,
although that pressure was offset to some extent by declines in oil
prices. Taken as a whole, incoming economic data were seen by market
participants as increasing the odds of a tightening of monetary policy
at some point but not necessarily in the very near term. Most
indexes of stock prices fell slightly over the intermeeting period,
but the strong performance of a few firms boosted the Dow Jones
Industrial Average to a new high near the end of the period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies was about unchanged on
balance over the intermeeting period. The dollar appreciated against
the yen in response to incoming data suggesting weakness in the
Japanese economy and heightened prospects for further monetary easing
by the Bank of Japan. Even though interest rates eased in Europe as
central banks lowered their money-market intervention rates, the
dollar was little changed against the German mark and declined
somewhat against other European currencies.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened appreciably in November;
both aggregates had risen at somewhat faster rates since late summer
than earlier in the year. Ml growth remained brisk in November, and
money funds included in M2 apparently benefited from a slowdown in
inflows to bond funds in the wake of the earlier decline in bond
prices. The pickup in M3 growth reflected a surge in term Eurodollar
deposits as well as faster growth of M2. For the year through
November, M2 and M3 were estimated to have grown at rates somewhat
above the lower end of the Committee's ranges for the year. Total
domestic nonfinancial debt had expanded moderately in recent months,
and for the year through November it was estimated to have increased
at a rate in the lower half of the Committee's monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that,
after a strong fourth-quarter advance, the economy would expand at a
more moderate rate in 1994. Consumer spending was projected to
decelerate to a rate more in line with the growth of disposable
income. Business fixed investment was expected to advance briskly,
although not quite as rapidly as in 1993, and further gains in
homebuilding activity likely would be concentrated in the first half
of the year. Exports were projected to strengthen somewhat, bolstered
by a modest pickup in foreign economic growth. Fiscal restraint was
expected to exert a substantial drag on spending, through both falling
government defense purchases and higher taxes. In light of the
limited margins of slack in labor and product markets, the ongoing
expansion was projected to be associated with only a slight further
reduction in inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members referred to widespread indications,
both statistical and anecdotal, of a marked strengthening in economic
activity and much improved business and consumer confidence in recent
months. The rate of economic growth could be expected to moderate
during the early months of 1994 from what currently appeared to be an
unsustainable pace, but the members viewed the extent of such
moderation as a key uncertainty in the outlook. A number of members
observed that a sharp slowing of the expansion early next year,
similar to the slowdown after the surge in activity during the closing
months of 1992, could not be ruled out. However, most saw the gains
in the economy as more solidly based than earlier in the expansion,
and they generally expected the economy to settle into a pattern of
moderate growth over coming quarters at a trend rate close to or
somewhat above the economy's long-run potential. With regard to the
outlook for inflation, the members saw little evidence in available
measures of prices and wages or in other indicators that any
significant change might already have occurred in underlying inflation
trends. Nonetheless, views varied somewhat with regard to the outlook
and ranged from expectations of some modest further decline in the
core rate of inflation to concerns about the possibility of some
acceleration in the context of diminishing margins of unemployed
production resources and an accommodative monetary policy as reflected
in low real short-term interest rates and continued rapid growth in
narrow measures of money and reserves.
In their comments about developments across the nation,
members observed that economic conditions clearly had strengthened in
many regions and that the better conditions had fostered appreciable
improvement in business and consumer sentiment in most parts of the
country. The members recognized that the economic expansion was still
quite subdued in many local areas and that economic activity remained
depressed in some parts of the country such as southern California.
The overall strength of the economy was fueled to an important extent
by interest-sensitive spending on producer and consumer durables and
housing and tended to confirm the durability of the expansion.
Gains in such spending were not likely to be sustained at their recent
rates, but the cash flow and income that such expenditures had
generated were likely to foster further economic growth, especially in
the context of generally supportive conditions in financial and credit
markets. The members acknowledged that a number of factors continued
to constrain the expansion, including ongoing though less pervasive
balance-sheet rebuilding, business restructuring and downsizing
activities, and the downtrend in defense spending. On balance,
however, current developments did not point to a marked deviation from
the moderate growth trend in economic activity that had been
experienced over the past two years, though in the view of a number of
members the odds on somewhat stronger growth were greater than they
had been earlier in the expansion.
With regard to the outlook for key sectors of the economy,
consumer expenditures were seen as likely to continue to provide vital
support to the expansion even though increases in consumer spending
were not likely to be maintained at recent rates. Members noted that
the improved consumer confidence and increased spending were reflected
in a somewhat greater willingness to incur debt, at least in the
context of reduced interest rates. Some members cautioned, however,
that growth in consumer expenditures had exceeded gains in incomes for
an extended period, insofar as could be judged from available data,
and an already low saving rate seemed likely to limit the potential
growth in such spending. Moreover, the negative impact of increased
tax rates on high incomes seemed likely to be felt especially during
the first half of 1994, though the extent of that impact on consumer
spending remained uncertain. On the positive side, members cited a
number of developments that would tend to bolster overall consumer
expenditures, including lower energy costs, reduced income taxes for
many individuals stemming from indexing, and lower interest charges on
various kinds of debt. More generally, the rise in consumer
confidence seemed to be related to perceptions of improving employment
opportunities despite continuing announcements of sizable workforce
reductions by some large firms.
The members expected growth in real business investment to
remain robust in 1994 but to decelerate somewhat from the rapid rate
of expansion over the past year. Continuing increases in business
sales and low financing costs along with ongoing efforts to improve
productivity were likely to remain conducive to substantial further
growth in overall spending for business equipment despite persisting
weakness in aerospace and defense-related industries. Nonresidential
construction activity, including commercial and industrial building
and infrastructure construction, displayed signs of considerable
strength in some parts of the country; and declining vacancy rates
pointed to a leveling out or even a pickup in nonresidential building
construction in a number of other areas. Some expansion in inventories seemed likely over the forecast horizon to accommodate the
continuing growth in overall demands. In this connection, members
noted that a rise in inventories probably contributed to the expansion
in production in recent months since the latter could not be explained
entirely by the strength of final demand, and a buildup of motor
vehicle stocks in late 1993 was likely to continue into the early part
of 1994.
The housing sector was expected to remain a source of
considerable economic stimulus during the early months of 1994, both
directly and indirectly in terms of the favorable effects on purchases
of home furnishings. Some members commented that the increases in
housing starts experienced over the closing months of this year might
not be sustainable; even so, housing construction, especially in the
single-family sector, should be relatively well maintained given the
likelihood that home ownership would remain comparatively affordable
in the context of growing incomes, favorable mortgage rates, and
limited pressures on the prices of new homes.
With respect to fiscal policy, members referred to the
prospects for further cutbacks in defense spending that probably would
continue to be offset only in part by growth in federal government
purchases of other goods and services. However, net reductions in
government purchases were expected to diminish over the projection
horizon. Likewise, adverse effects on spending of the rise in tax
rates on higher incomes would tend to be concentrated in the first
half of 1994, and the impact on spending over the months ahead might
well be relatively limited because many taxpayers probably had
anticipated the higher taxes and had taken measures to mitigate or
spread out their effects or would meet new tax obligations partly out
of savings. Proposed health care reform legislation would exert a
restraining effect on the economy, should it be enacted, owing to
mandated cost increases on employers. If this form of financing were
adopted, however, the legislation might have little, or perhaps even a
favorable, effect on the federal deficit.
The external sector of the economy also appeared likely to
have a moderating effect on domestic economic activity over the year
ahead. The economies of key foreign industrial nations and thus U.S.
exports to those nations were projected to grow only gradually, while
the expansion of U.S. imports was likely to remain relatively robust
on the basis of current expectations for domestic economic activity.
In the view of at least some members, however, stimulative economic
policies in a number of foreign countries might well lead to stronger
economic performances and to greater demand for U.S. goods and
services than many observers currently anticipated. In any event, the
members generally agreed that the outlook for developments abroad
remained a source of particular uncertainty for the domestic economy.
Members commented that there were few indications of any
change in inflationary trends in broad measures of prices and wages
despite the surge in economic activity in recent months and associated
increases in capacity utilization rates. One important sign of
growing inflationary pressures, rising lead times for deliveries of
materials, had not emerged. Some members noted that while capacity
usage rates were approaching or had reached levels that in the past
had tended to signal the onset of rising inflation, the growth of
competition stemming from the internationalization of numerous markets
suggested that old capacity benchmarks might no longer apply and,
especially in the context of excess capacity in many foreign
economies, the potential inflationary effects of strong domestic
demand pressures might remain subdued for some period of time. In
keeping with these assessments, members again reported on the absence
of inflationary cost pressures in local areas across the country and
on persisting comments by business contacts regarding their inability
to raise prices to achieve more satisfactory or customary profit
margins. Business executives continued to look to improvements in
productivity to maintain or increase their margins, and there were
numerous reports of considerable success in implementing productivity
gains. Price developments in commodity markets presented a mixed
picture; higher food prices stemming from weather conditions earlier
in the year had had an adverse effect on broad measures of prices, but
the drop in energy prices had favorable implications for the near-term
inflation outlook.
It also was noted that rising inflationary pressures often
were accompanied by a pickup in credit demands, and there was no
evidence of any surge in such demands. However, the expansion of
overall nonfinancial debt had strengthened to a degree. Moreover, in
the view of some members, the rise in long-term interest rates and in
gold prices might well have been caused in part by heightened
inflation concerns. Members also cited scattered examples of greater
price pressures, notably the prices of lumber and some other building
materials and of related efforts to pass on the added costs through
higher prices on new homes in some areas. Despite the absence of any
general indication of rising inflation, a number of members expressed
concern about the potential for increasing inflationary pressures in
the economy and saw a need to monitor possible future sources of
inflation with special care over the period ahead, especially in light
of the considerable lags between monetary policy actions and their
effects on prices.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the
period until the next scheduled meeting in early February, a majority
of the members endorsed a proposal to maintain unchanged conditions in
reserve markets and to retain the currently unbiased instruction in
the directive concerning possible intermeeting adjustments to policy.
Looking forward, many of the members commented that the Committee
probably would have to firm reserve conditions at some point to adjust
monetary policy from its currently quite accommodative stance to a
more neutral position, and that such a policy move might have to be
made sooner rather than later to contain inflation and continue to
provide a sound basis for sustained economic expansion. Monetary
conditions had been eased to their current degree of accommodation in
the 1990-1992 period in the context of balance-sheet restructuring and
other unusual forces that were holding down spending. Since the
latter part of 1992, however, downside risks to the expansion had
diminished considerably as financial conditions became more supportive
of economic activity. Borrowers and lenders had strengthened their
financial positions substantially and were less reluctant to use and
extend credit. Moreover, the low level of real short-term interest
rates and in the view of some members the continued rapid growth of
reserves or increases in a variety of commodity prices provided
evidence of a quite accommodative monetary policy. Overstaying such a
policy would incur an increasing risk of fostering greater inflationary pressures that in turn would undermine the sustainablity of the
expansion. For now, however, a majority believed that the risks
remained at an acceptable level, given the remaining slack in the
economy and the lack of near-term inflation pressures. Waiting for
further developments before making any policy move was warranted in
light of the uncertainties surrounding the outlook, notably with
regard to the extent of the moderation in economic growth expected
early next year. If the economy settled into a pattern of growth
about in line with its potential, the chances of greater inflation
pressures down the road would be reduced and the need for a near-term
policy adjustment would be less pressing, though it would still be
required at some point.
Two members expressed a strong preference for a prompt move
toward a firmer policy stance to forestall inflation pressures. A
number of others commented that the decision was a close call,
including two who had a marginal preference for tightening policy at
this time but who could accept a delay in light of the uncertainties
that were involved.
Members who could support an unchanged policy stance also
indicated their acceptance of a directive that was not biased in
either direction with regard to possible adjustments in the degree of
reserve pressure during the intermeeting period. Some observed that
while the flow of economic reports during this period was likely to
underscore the marked strengthening of the economy, those reports
mainly would cover developments in the fourth quarter, and from a
monetary policy perspective the members were more interested in
knowing something about the extent of the follow-through strength
early in the new year. Moreover, the members recognized that any
tightening move would represent a turn in policy that might well have
a greater-than-usual effect on financial markets. This prospect
argued for taking such an action at a meeting, with the benefit of a
full Committee review of the implications for future growth and
inflation pressures of a wide variety of emerging developments--including those in money, credit, and financial markets--rather than
an intermeeting action based on an asymmetric directive. In the view
of one member, a tightening action over the coming intermeeting period
would incur an undue risk of an exaggerated response in financial
markets, given the likelihood of thin trading markets around year-end;
and since a policy move should be postponed, a symmetrical directive
seemed appropriate.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but two
of the members indicated that they could support a directive that
called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that did not include a presumption about the likely
direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
According to a staff analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at
this meeting would be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3
over the months ahead.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
a strong advance in economic activity in recent months.
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose appreciably
further in November, and the civilian unemployment rate
fell considerably to 6.4 percent. Industrial
production increased sharply in October and November,
partly reflecting a continuing rebound in the output of
motor vehicles. Retail sales were up moderately in
November after, a large increase in October. Housing
starts advanced substantially in November. Business
equipment expenditures have been rising rapidly, and
nonresidential construction has turned up from
depressed levels. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade
deficit in October was about unchanged from its average
rate in the third quarter. Broad indexes of consumer
and producer prices suggest little change in inflation
trends, although prices of some raw materials have
increased recently.
Short-term interest rates have changed little,
while intermediate- and long-term rates have risen
slightly since the Committee meeting on November 16.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value
of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies is
about unchanged on balance over the intermeeting
period.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in November, and
both aggregates have risen at somewhat faster rates
since late summer than earlier in the year. For the
year through November, M2 and M3 are estimated to have
grown at rates somewhat above the lower end of the
Committee's ranges for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has expanded at a moderate rate in
recent months, and for the year through November it is
estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For 1994, the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, McTeer,
Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Angell
and Lindsey.
Messrs. Angell and Lindsey dissented because they believed
that monetary policy was overly accommodative and needed to be
adjusted promptly toward a more neutral stance to counter potential
inflationary pressures in the economy. They referred to the long lags
with which monetary policy exerts its effects on inflation and the
consequent need to adjust monetary policy on a timely basis to foster
the Committee's long-run objective of stable prices. They understood
the difficulty of finding the appropriate circumstances for tightening
actions so as to avoid unintended interpretations and repercussions in
financial markets. In their judgment, economic and financial conditions were unlikely to be more favorable later and waiting risked
undesirable inflationary consequences.
Mr. Angell also stressed that the Committee should focus more
directly on forward-looking indicators such as the price of gold and
the estimate of the natural rate of interest provided by the rate on
five-year Treasury notes. He favored an immediate increase of 50
basis points in the federal funds rate, which would enable the
Committee to observe how the market adjusted the price of gold to the
changed opportunity cost of holding gold. He believed that if bond
market participants concluded that the Committee was using the price
of gold to target the price level, five-year and ten-year interest
rates would then be significantly lower than if the Committee's
tightening was a belated response to a worsening outlook for
inflation. He emphasized that the objective of monetary policy
clearly should be stable money which produces stable prices and an
ongoing optimal and stable economic growth path.
Mr. Lindsey commented further that a modest policy move now
would appropriately signal the Committee's concern about the potential
for inflation. Such an action would begin the process of moving
policy away from what he perceived as an unsustainable stance. He
also noted that foreign competition had been restraining pressures on
domestic prices, and the policy course he had in mind would continue
to help in that regard by supporting the foreign exchange value of the
dollar.
Request for access to conference call record.
At this meeting the Committee considered a request from Mr.
Henry B. Gonzalez, Chairman of the House Committee on Banking,
Finance, and Urban Affairs, for access by his staff to the tape
recording and transcript of the Committee's telephone conference on
October 15, 1993. The main purpose of the conference call was to
discuss what position the Committee should take on the release of
material about its deliberations that are contained in historical
files of meeting transcripts; the issue undoubtedly would be raised in
the near future, probably during upcoming testimony before Chairman
Gonzalez' Committee on October 19, 1993.
Chairman Gonzalez had indicated that he was investigating the
possibility that Committee members had conspired during the conference
call to hide information from the House Banking Committee. The
accusation was wholly without merit, but at this stage the Committee
could fully vindicate itself only by making the tape and transcript
available to Congressional staff for their review.
Such a step would be taken with considerable reluctance.
The recording in question did not contain a discussion of monetary
policy, but it did involve Committee deliberations, which are
protected from public disclosure by the Freedom of Information Act.
Some members expressed concern that granting access to this material
could be viewed as setting a precedent for the premature release of
other tapes and transcripts, with adverse effects on the Committee's
deliberations. However, the Committee's General Counsel expressed the
opinion that the Committee could make an exception for this transcript
without prejudicing its ability to withhold deliberative or other
privileged materials in other transcripts under the Freedom of
Information Act. The members agreed with a proposal from the Chairman
that the staff of Chairman Gonzalez and of certain other Banking
Committee members be allowed to listen to the tape recording of the
October 15 conference call. The review would be conducted at the
offices of the Board of Governors, and the Congressional staff members
would be asked to keep confidential the information to be made
available to them. The members indicated that it should be made clear
that access to the tape in question was being undertaken solely to
dispel the unfounded allegations regarding the Committee's actions.
The Committee already had decided to make public with a 5-year lag
lightly edited versions of all the transcripts currently in the
possession of the FOMC Secretariat. These transcripts as edited will
include all the deliberative materials except for highly sensitive
information that can continue to be withheld under the provisions of
the Freedom of Information Act.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Thursday-Friday, February 3-4, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 1:30 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007