FRB: FOMC Minutes--February 2-3, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of February 2-3, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 2, 1993, at 2:30 p.m. and was
continued on Wednesday, February 3, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis,1 Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,
and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations
Ms. Lovett,2 Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Brady,3 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Rosine,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Wiles,4 Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Winn,4 Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Ms. Werneke,4 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Siciliano,4 Special Assistant to the General Counsel,
Legal Division, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Dewald, Goodfriend, and Ms.
Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
1. Attended Wednesday session only.
2. Attended Tuesday session only.
3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.
4. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the release of
FOMC information to the public.
The Secretary reported that advices of the election of the
Reserve Bank members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee for the period commencing January 1, 1993, and ending
December 31, 1993, had been received and that these individuals had
executed their oaths of office. The elected members and alternate
members were as follows:
E. Gerald Corrigan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
with James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, as alternate;
Edward G. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, with J. Alfred Broaddus, Jr., President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate;
Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with
Jerry L. Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, as alternate;
Robert D. McTeer, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, with Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, as alternate;
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
with Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the Committee elected the following
officers of the Federal Open Market Committee to serve until the
election of their successors at the first meeting of the Committee
after December 31, 1993, with the understanding that in the event of
the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of
Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any
official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan
Chairman
E. Gerald Corrigan
Vice Chairman
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Joseph R. Coyne
Assistant Secretary
Gary P. Gillum
Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.
General Counsel
Ernest T. Patrikis
Deputy General Counsel
Michael J. Prell
Economist
Edwin M. Truman
Economist
Richard G. Davis, Richard W. Lang,
David E. Lindsey, Larry J. Promisel,
Arthur J. Rolnick, Harvey Rosenblum,
Karl A. Scheld, Charles J. Siegman,
Thomas D. Simpson, and Lawrence Slifman
Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after
December 31, 1993.
By unanimous vote, William J. McDonough, Margaret L. Greene,
and Joan E. Lovett were selected to serve at the pleasure of the
Committee in the capacities of Manager of the System Open Market
Account, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market
Account, and Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open
Market Account respectively, on the understanding that their selection
was subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
Secretary's note: Advice subsequently was received
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
On January 15, 1993, the continuing rules, regulations,
authorizations, and other instruments of the Committee listed below
were distributed with the advice that, in accordance with procedures
approved by the Committee, they were being called to the Committee's
attention before the February 2-3 organization meeting to give members
an opportunity to raise any questions they might have concerning them.
Members were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the
instruments in question placed on the agenda for consideration at this
meeting. No requests for substantive consideration were received.
At the meeting; the Committee voted unanimously to update the
references to the Management of the System Open Market Account that
were contained in the following: (1) Procedures for allocation of
securities in the System Open Market Account and (2) Program for
Security of FOMC Information. Apart from the indicated updating of
titles, all of the instruments listed below remained in effect in
their existing forms.
1. Procedures for allocation of securities in the System Open Market
Account.
2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve Bank as
agent to operate the System Account in case the New York Bank is
unable to function.
3. Resolution of FOMC to provide for the continued operation of the
Committee during an emergency; Resolution of FOMC authorizing
certain actions by Federal Reserve Banks during an emergency.
4. Resolution relating to examinations of the System Open Market
Account.
5. Guidelines for the conduct of System operations in Federal agency
issues.
6. Regulation relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve
Banks.
7. Program for Security of FOMC Information.
8. Federal Open Market Committee Rules.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market
Operations, as shown below, was reaffirmed:
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the
extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic
policy directive adopted at a meeting of the Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U. S. Government securities,
including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully
guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of
the United States in the open market, from or to
securities dealers and foreign and international accounts
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such
Account, to exchange maturing U. S. Government and
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without
replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of U. S.
Government and Federal agency securities held in such
Account (including forward commitments) at the close of
business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at
which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy
directive shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $8.0 billion during the period commencing with the
opening of business on the day following such meeting and
ending with the close of business on the day of the next
such meeting;
(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open
market, from or to acceptance dealers and foreign
accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for
the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at
market discount rates, prime bankers acceptances with
maturities of up to nine months at the time of acceptance
that (1) arise out of the current shipment of goods
between countries or within the United States, or (2)
arise out of the storage within the United States of
goods under contract of sale or expected to move into the
channels of trade within a reasonable time and that are
secured throughout their life by a warehouse receipt or
similar document conveying title to the underlying goods;
provided that the aggregate amount of bankers acceptances
held at any one time shall not exceed $100 million;
(c) To buy U. S. Government securities, obligations
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to
principal and interest by, any agency of the United
States, and prime bankers acceptances of the types
authorized for purchase under l(b) above, from dealers
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
under agreements for repurchase of such securities,
obligations, or acceptances in 15 calendar days or less,
at rates that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by
the Committee, shall be determined by competitive
bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the
volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided
that in the event Government securities or agency issues
covered by any such agreement are not repurchased by the
dealer pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof,
they shall be sold in the market or transferred to the
System Open Market Account; and provided further that in
the event bankers acceptances covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the seller, they shall
continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall
be sold in the open market.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Banks to lend
U. S. Government securities held in the System Open
Market Account to Government securities dealers and to
banks participating in Government securities clearing
arrangements conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank,
under such instructions as the Committee may specify from
time to time.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
market operations, while assisting in the provision of
short-term investments for foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for
System Open Market Account, to sell U. S. Government
securities to such foreign and international accounts on
the bases set forth in paragraph l(a) under agreements
providing for the resale by such accounts of those
securities within 15 calendar days on terms comparable to
those available on such transactions in the market; and
(b) for New York Bank account, when appropriate, to
undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed
on purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l(c),
repurchase agreements in U. S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and
repurchase agreements between its own account and foreign
and international accounts maintained at the Bank.
Transactions undertaken with such accounts under the
provisions of this paragraph may provide for a service
fee when appropriate.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency
Operations was amended to update the title of the Manager of the
System Open Market Account. The Authorization, as amended, is shown
below:
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and
directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System
Open Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry out
the Committee's foreign currency directive and express
authorizations by the Committee pursuant thereto, and in
conformity with such procedural instructions as the
Committee may issue from time to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or
forward transactions on the open market at home and
abroad, including transactions with the U. S. Treasury,
with the U. S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign
monetary authorities, with the Bank for International
Settlements, and with other international financial
institutions:
Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Netherlands guilders
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward
contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign
currencies listed in paragraph A above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign
banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency
arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that
drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be
fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount
outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the
Committee, because of exceptional circumstances,
specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign
currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this
purpose, the overall open position in all foreign
currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of
net positions in individual currencies. The net position
in a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of
balances in that currency, plus outstanding contracts for
future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for future
delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of these
elements with due regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal
currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for the
System Open Market Account for periods up to a maximum of
12 months with the following foreign banks, which are
among those designated by the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 of Regulation
N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and with the
approval of the Committee to renew such arrangements on
maturity:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of dollars
equivalent)
Austrian National Bank
250
National Bank of Belgium
1,000
Bank of Canada
2,000
National Bank of Denmark
250
Bank of England
3,000
Bank of France
2,000
German Federal Bank
6,000
Bank of Italy
3,000
Bank of Japan
5,000
Bank of Mexico
700
Netherlands Bank
500
Bank of Norway
250
Bank of Sweden
300
Swiss National Bank
4,000
Bank for International Settlements:
Dollars against Swiss francs
600
Dollars against authorized European currencies other than Swiss francs
1,250
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements,
and the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may
be authorized, shall be referred for review and
approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken
under paragraph I(A) above shall, unless otherwise
expressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing
market rates. For the purpose of providing an
investment return on System holdings of foreign
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting interest
rates paid or received in connection with swap
drawings, transactions with foreign central banks may
be undertaken at non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with
foreign central banks for the coordination of foreign
currency transactions. In making operating
arrangements with foreign central banks on System
holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York shall not commit itself to maintain
any specific balance, unless authorized by the Federal
Open Market Committee. Any agreements or
understandings concerning the administration of the
accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York with the foreign banks designated by the Board of
Governors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be
referred for review and approval to the Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested
insofar as practicable, considering needs for minimum
working balances. Such investments shall be in liquid
form, and generally have no more than 12 months
remaining to maturity. When appropriate in connection
with arrangements to provide investment facilities for
foreign currency holdings, U. S. Government securities
may be purchased from foreign central banks under
agreements for repurchase of such securities within 30
calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the
preceding paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the
Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee. The
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the Chairman
and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman
of the Board of Governors, and such other member of the
Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence
of members of the Board serving on the Subcommittee,
other Board Members designated by the Chairman as
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of
the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of the
Subcommittee shall be called at the request of any
member, or at the request of the Manager of the System
Open Market Account, for the purposes of reviewing
recent or contemplated operations and of consulting
with the Manager on other matters relating to his
responsibilities. At the request of any member of the
Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and
consultations shall be referred for determination to
the Federal Open Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter
into any needed agreement or understanding with the
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of
responsibility for foreign currency operations between
the System and the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully
advised concerning System foreign currency operations,
and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters
relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate
reports and information to the National Advisory
Council on International Monetary and Financial
Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to
transmit pertinent information on System foreign
currency operations to appropriate officials of the
Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the
foreign currency operations for System Account in
accordance with paragraph 3 G(1) of the Board of
Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated
January 1, 1944.
By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive, as shown
below, was reaffirmed:
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall
generally be directed at countering disorderly market
conditions, provided that market exchange rates for the
U. S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent
with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales
of foreign exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap")
arrangements with selected foreign central banks and
with the Bank for International Settlements.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks
of other countries and with international monetary
institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable
future needs for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and to
facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization
Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly
authorized by the Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be
conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and
cooperation with the United States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign
monetary authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of
the United States in the International Monetary Fund
regarding exchange arrangements under the IMF Article
IV.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with respect
to Foreign Currency Operations were amended to update the title of the
Manager of the System Open Market Account. The Procedural
Instructions, as amended, are shown below:
In conducting operations pursuant to the
authorization and direction of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign
Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the
Manager of the System Open Market Account ("Manager"),
shall be guided by the following procedural
understandings with respect to consultations and
clearance with the Committee, the Foreign Currency
Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All
operations undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall
be reported promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or
with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that
consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in
the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in
the System's overall open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day or $600
million since the most recent regular meeting of the
Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on
any day in the System's net position in a single
foreign currency exceeding $150 million, or $300
million when the operation is associated with repayment
of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a
substantial volume of trading in a particular currency
by the System, even though the change in the System's
net position in that currency might be less than the
limits specified in 1B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15
percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes
that consultation with the full Committee is not
feasible in the time available, or with the Chairman,
if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in
the System's overall open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most recent
regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15
percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the
Subcommittee or the Chairman about proposed swap
drawings by the System, and about any operations that
are not of a routine character.
The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,
conducted by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and
Payments Systems as of the close of business on July 31, 1992, was
accepted.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 22,
1992, were approved.
The Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets during the period December
22, 1992, through February 2, 1993. There were no System open market
transactions in foreign currencies during this period, and thus no
vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market
transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations
during the period December 22, 1992, through February 2, 1993. By
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in 1993, and the
implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead.
A summary of the economic and financial information available at the
time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion is provided
below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was approved by
the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting indicated that
economic activity rose appreciably further in the fourth quarter.
Final demands were buoyed by strength in consumption, business
spending for durable equipment, and residential construction.
Manufacturing activity also increased considerably, and employment
appeared to be on a modest upward trajectory, despite a continuing
flow of announcements of layoffs by large corporations. Although
recent data on wages and prices had been mixed, on balance they
suggested that inflation was trending gradually lower.
Total nonfarm payroll employment registered a small increase
in December for the fourth consecutive month. Service industries,
notably business and health services, and retail trade accounted for
nearly all of the rise in jobs. Manufacturing and construction
payrolls changed little, and government employment fell as temporary
election workers were dropped from payrolls. The civilian unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent, almost 1/2 percentage point below
its mid-year peak but slightly above its level at the beginning of the
year.
Industrial production advanced further in December and was up
considerably over the fourth quarter as a whole. Motor vehicle
assemblies rose sharply during the quarter; strong gains also were
registered in business equipment, partly reflecting a further jump in
output of computers, and in nondurable consumer goods. By contrast,
the production of durable consumer goods other than motor vehicles was
lower on balance after changing little over the third quarter, and the
output of defense and space equipment remained on a downward trend.
Total utilization of industrial capacity increased significantly in
the fourth quarter and for the year as a whole.
Consumer spending was up substantially in the fourth quarter.
Retail sales, after rising sharply in October and changing little in
November, posted a further sizable increase in December. The largest
sales gains in the fourth quarter were reported at automotive dealers
and at building material and supply outlets, but most other types of
retail stores also recorded higher sales. By contrast, consumer
spending for services, as indicated by data on personal consumption
expenditures, rose more slowly. Housing starts surged in December,
with single family starts reaching their highest level in nearly three
years and multifamily starts picking up slightly from the very low
levels of October and November. Sales of new and existing homes
remained on a strong upward trend in December.
Real outlays for business fixed investment apparently
registered a notable gain in the fourth quarter, particularly for
producers' durable equipment. Shipments of nondefense capital goods
rose in November and December after changing little in October; for
the quarter as a whole, shipments advanced substantially, with
increases widespread by category. Business purchases of cars and
trucks were up sharply in the fourth quarter, while nonresidential
construction activity retraced a small part of a third-quarter
decline.
Business inventories expanded moderately in November as a
sizable drop in manufacturing inventories was more than offset by
increases in wholesale and retail inventories. At the manufacturing
level, the drawdown of stocks was associated with strong shipments of
durable goods, and inventory-to-shipments ratios in most industries
were at or near the bottom of their recent ranges. In the wholesale
sector, sizable inventory increases were reported in November for a
second straight month; most of the buildup was limited to machinery,
motor vehicles, and miscellaneous nondurable goods. With stocks
rising in line with sales since September, the stock-to-sales ratio in
wholesaling remained at the low end of its range over the past year.
Retail inventories increased moderately further in November; the
inventory-to-sales ratio for the sector was slightly below its average
for previous months of the year.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit widened slightly
in November. For October and November together, however, the deficit
narrowed a little from its average rate in the third quarter, as the
value of exports rose more than the value of imports. Most of the
increase in exports was in capital goods, both machinery and aircraft,
and in consumer goods. Passenger cars accounted for a considerable
part of the rise in imports, while the inflow of consumer goods eased
from the very strong pace of the third quarter. Recent indicators
suggested that economic activity had remained weak in the major
foreign industrial countries and that unemployment rates had increased
further in most of those countries. The recovery in Canada appeared
to be continuing, but the downturn in western Germany and Japan
evidently had persisted into the fourth quarter.
A small November decline in producer prices of finished
goods was reversed in December, with a rebound in prices of finished
foods outweighing a further drop in energy prices. For finished items
other than food and energy, producer prices rose in December, but the
advance followed six months of no change on balance; for 1992 as a
whole, this measure of prices increased by a considerably smaller
amount than in 1991. At the consumer level, the index for prices of
nonfood, non-energy items edged higher in December after somewhat
larger increases in the two preceding months. The rise in this index
in 1992 was the smallest for any year since the early 1970s, when wage
and price controls were in effect. Hourly compensation of private
industry workers advanced a little more rapidly in the fourth quarter
than in the two previous quarters, but the rise in total compensation
over the year as a whole was considerably smaller than in 1991. The
slowing of labor cost increases last year occurred in both the wages
and benefits components.
At its meeting on December 22, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
associated with this directive were expected to be consistent with
expansion of M2 at an annual rate of about 1-1/2 percent and with M3
remaining about unchanged on balance over the four-month period from
November through March.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was well above expected
levels in the first two full reserve maintenance periods in the
intermeeting interval; borrowing was sizable over the long New Year's
weekend and also later when unusually heavy Treasury tax receipts
drained reserves from the banking system. The federal funds rate
averaged close to expected levels over the intermeeting period.
However, the rate was somewhat volatile in late December as a result
of sizable swings in market factors affecting reserves and of shifting
market anticipations regarding year-end pressures.
Most other short-term interest rates declined somewhat over
the intermeeting period, in part reflecting the passing of year-end
pressures. Intermediate- and long-term rates, including those on
fixed-rate mortgages, also moved somewhat lower; the declines occurred
in response to growing indications that any proposed near-term fiscal
stimulus would be quite moderate and that the new Administration
intended to recommend steps, possibly including new taxes, to lower
the trajectory of the fiscal deficit appreciably over time. Broad
indexes of stock prices exhibited mixed results over the intermeeting
period: Indexes giving heavy weight to large companies changed
little, while those primarily reflecting smaller companies rose
significantly.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose on balance over the
intermeeting period. Through early January, the dollar appreciated
against both the yen and the mark, especially the latter, in response
to actual and expected further declines in interest rates in Japan and
Germany. Subsequently, the dollar's gains were partially erased as
the prospects for near-term easing in Germany diminished somewhat and
perceptions grew that fiscal initiatives in the United States would
lower the deficit and reduce the chances that monetary policy might be
tightened in the months ahead.
After expanding at a moderate pace over the course of earlier
months, M2 contracted in December and January. Some of the weakness
reflected a slowdown in Ml growth associated with lower mortgage
refinancing activity. Within M2's nontransaction component, the
expansion of savings and money market deposit accounts slowed
abruptly, perhaps owing in part to the wider spread that had developed
during the fall between market rates and those paid on these accounts,
as well as to the use of monies in these accounts to fund a step-up in
consumer purchases and nonwithheld tax payments. In addition, the
continued attractiveness to investors of bond and stock mutual funds
might have contributed to a quickening of the runoff of holdings of
money market mutual funds and to the persisting weakness in other M2
accounts. Appreciable declines in M3 in December and January
reflected both the contraction in M2 and reduced needs by banks for
managed liabilities at a time of weak overall credit demand. From the
fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992, both M2 and M3
grew at rates somewhat below the lower ends of the Committee's annual
ranges. Total domestic nonfinancial debt appeared to have expanded at
the lower end of the Committee's monitoring range for 1992.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic activity would expand over the year ahead at a pace that
would be sufficient to reduce gradually margins of unemployed labor
and capital. Recent declines in long-term interest rates and more
optimistic attitudes on the part of businesses and households were
expected to support further solid gains in business fixed investment
and in homebuying. Continuing progress in reducing debt service
burdens and a gradual lessening of concerns regarding job security
were projected to foster an expansion of consumer spending a shade
faster than the growth in incomes. Export demand would be damped for
some period of time by the appreciation of the dollar since mid-1992,
but an anticipated pickup in growth abroad later this year would begin
to counteract the effects of the higher dollar. Against the
background of considerable uncertainties associated with still
unannounced fiscal policy initiatives, the staff retained for this
forecast the assumption contained in several previous forecasts that
fiscal policy would remain mildly restrictive, largely because of
declining defense outlays. The persisting slack in resource
utilization over the forecast horizon was expected to be associated
with some additional progress in reducing inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members were encouraged by the mounting
evidence of appreciable momentum in the economic expansion. On the
whole, recent developments tended to reinforce their forecasts of
continuing growth at a moderate pace over the year ahead, especially
in light of the improvement in business and consumer confidence. The
impact of some retarding influences on the expansion, notably various
balance sheet adjustment activities, appeared to be waning. In
addition, while some major sectors of the economy such as defense
spending and commercial construction remained weak, the economy was
benefitting from considerable growth in consumer spending, from rising
business expenditures for producer equipment, and from increasing
outlays for housing. In one view, the recent behavior of commodity
prices also tended to indicate some strengthening in the economy's
expansion. Despite various indications of a more firmly established
expansion, however, the members felt that the outlook remained subject
to a good deal of uncertainty, and some commented that substantial
deviations--in either direction--from their current forecasts could
not be ruled out. It was noted in this connection that the specifics
of the President's fiscal policy proposals were still unknown, and
their reception by the public and the Congress would have a major
influence on confidence, interest rates, and the performance of the
economy. Other sources of uncertainty related to the outlook for
further restructuring activities that involved cutbacks in operations
and employment by many firms, and the prospective lending policies of
banking institutions. With regard to the outlook for inflation, most
of the members believed that some further progress toward stable
prices was likely over the year ahead, given an economic outcome about
in line with their forecasts of continued, albeit reduced, margins of
unutilized or underutilized productive resources. Some members also
referred to the extended period of relatively sluggish growth in the
broad measures of money as a favorable indicator in the outlook for
inflation.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt
aggregates, the Committee members and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had prepared projections
of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and inflation for
1993. The central tendencies of the forecasts pointed to slightly
faster economic growth this year than currently seemed to have
occurred in 1992. The anticipated rate of economic expansion would be
at a pace that was rapid enough to reduce the rate of unemployment a
little further. Nonetheless, with some slack in productive resources
persisting, price and cost pressures would remain subdued and modest
additional moderation in inflation was expected by most members.
Measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993, the forecasts for growth of real GDP had a central tendency of 3
to 3-1/4 percent within a full range of 2-1/2 to 4 percent. Projections of the civilian rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter of
1993 were concentrated in the upper half of a 6-1/2 to 7 percent
range.  For the  CPI, the central tendency of the forecasts for the
period from the  fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of  1993
was  centered on  increases in  a range of 2-1/2 to  2-3/4 percent, and
for nominal GDP the forecasts were clustered in a range of 5-1/2 to 6
percent for the year.
In the course of the Committee's discussion of various
factors underlying the outlook for economic activity, the members
observed that on the whole the effects of a number of structural
impediments to the expansion seemed to be diminishing as the financial
condition of households, business firms, and financial institutions
continued to improve. Household and business debt-service burdens had
eased substantially, but it remained difficult to predict to what
extent and for how long the ongoing balance sheet adjustments would
continue to divert an unusual proportion of cash flows from spending
to balance sheet repair. Improved profitability and new capital-market issuance had strengthened the capital positions of banking
institutions, and in general they were now in a much better position
to augment their lending activities. However, there were few
indications thus far of any easing in terms or standards on business
loans, and the depressed and uncertain values of commercial mortgages
and real estate held in bank portfolios might continue to exert an
inhibiting effect on the willingness of banks to lend. Another
negative factor was the persistence of downsizing and other
restructuring activities by numerous firms, notably large businesses.
Such restructuring activities had not fully run their course as many
firms continued to pare excess production capacity and to modernize
production facilities to meet strong competition in domestic and
foreign markets. The resulting layoffs had damped overall job growth.
Despite tepid job growth, retail sales had strengthened
markedly during the closing months of 1992, and several members
commented that such sales had continued to display surprising vigor in
some parts of the country during the early weeks of 1993. Apart from
the improvement in consumer sentiment, other favorable factors cited
with regard to the outlook for consumer spending included lower debt-service burdens and the capital gains or enhanced cash flows now being
realized as sales of homes picked up and mortgage refinancings again
strengthened. Some members nonetheless expressed a degree of concern
about the sustainability of the gains in consumer spending unless
there were faster growth in employment and income to support such
spending. Announcements by prominent firms of cutbacks in their
workforces had continued into the new year, and while job gains at
other firms, especially smaller ones, were contributing to modest net
growth in overall employment, the publicity surrounding the persisting
job cutbacks and a tendency for many new jobs to be lower-paying added
an element of caution to the outlook for consumer expenditures. On
balance, with the measured saving rate already at a low level, though
an argument could be made that the actual rate was somewhat higher
than indicated by the currently published data, consumer spending
seemed likely to expand about in line with the growth in consumer
incomes over the coming year.
The growth in consumer incomes in turn was likely to depend
importantly on the expansion in business investment spending, and
members cited a number of factors that were expected to provide a
favorable setting for sustained momentum in such spending over the
year ahead. These included the strengthening of final demands, the
recent declines in intermediate -and long-term interest rates, the
greater leeway for financial intermediaries to increase their lending
to businesses, and a continuing desire by business firms to improve
their operating efficiencies. Commercial construction activity,
however, was likely to remain quite sluggish. There were indications
that commercial real estate values had stabilized in a number of
areas, but at low levels, and given the persistence of marked
imbalances in numerous real estate markets that were the result of
several years of overbuilding, a significant rebound in commercial
building activity for the nation as a whole might well be several
years away. The outlook for housing construction was much more
promising. Against the background of a general upswing in consumer
confidence and the improved balance sheets of many households, the
declines that had occurred in mortgage interest rates had fostered a
marked strengthening in the demand for single-family housing as
evidenced by reports from many parts of the country as well as the
overall statistics on housing. On the basis of these developments,
the members anticipated a continuing impetus to the economic expansion
from housing construction and from related industries over the year
ahead. In addition, the current indications of generally lean
business inventories, associated in part with strong final demands
over the past several months, suggested that the prospects for further
gains in overall spending were likely to stimulate efforts by business
firms to build up inventories over the quarters ahead.
The increasing signs of slow growth or recession in a number
of foreign nations represented a greater downside risk to the demand
for U.S. exports than had been apparent earlier. It was noted, for
example, that firms engaged in business activities abroad were
reporting substantial deterioration in markets for U.S. goods in many
foreign countries. Growth in U.S. exports might remain positive over
the year ahead, but against the background of a relatively expansive
U.S. economy and the dollar's recent appreciation, the value of
exports might well fall increasingly short of that of imports with
adverse effects on the growth of U.S. economic activity.
Turning to the outlook for fiscal policy, members were
encouraged by the prospect that the President would soon propose a
program that would produce substantial reductions in the federal
deficit over the years ahead. Such a deficit-reduction program, if
deemed credible, could result in lower intermediate- and long-term
interest rates than would otherwise prevail--even before the program
was enacted--with very positive implications for interest-sensitive
expenditures. For the nearer term, the President was expected to
announce some modest fiscal stimulus relative to what was currently in
train. However, the specifics of the President's proposals were not
yet known and there was little current basis on which to judge
prospective public and Congressional reactions. Members emphasized
the critical need for long-term deficit reduction, and some expressed
concern about the adverse effects on financial markets if fiscal
stimulus measures were to be enacted for the short run without the
assurance of further legislation to cut federal deficits over time.
With regard to the outlook for inflation, most of the members
anticipated that the trend toward lower price and wage inflation would
be sustained over the year ahead, and one member observed that the
disinflationary momentum in the economy might well be underestimated.
Favorable developments relating to the outlook for inflation included
evidence of slowing increases in labor costs and continued aggressive
efforts by many business firms to improve productivity and reduce
costs in the face of intense competition from domestic and foreign
producers. Indeed, anecdotal reports from around the country
continued to suggest little or no upward pressure on prices in many
regions. In addition, the behavior of interest rates in longer-term
debt markets was consistent with spreading expectations of gradually
diminishing inflation. Some members believed, however, that little or
no further progress in reducing inflation was a more likely outcome in
the year ahead, though none anticipated higher inflation. Some
commodity price indexes had edged higher recently, apparently in
response to growing demands related to strengthening activity in
several sectors of the economy. Lumber prices in particular had risen
considerably in conjunction with the uptrend in single-family housing
construction and various constraints on lumber supplies. Some
business contacts reported for the first time in a long while that
they were experiencing or anticipated some upward pressure on their
raw materials prices. Further, while most business contacts saw or
anticipated little or no upward pressure on prices in their own
industries, many continued to expect rising inflation more generally.
The still relatively steep slope of the yield curve and its
implications with regard to expectations of future increases in
interest rates also suggested that investors remained concerned about
the possibility of higher inflation over the longer run, even though
such concerns might have abated somewhat recently and did not appear
to extend to the next year or two. In general, however, the members
viewed the inflation outlook with considerable optimism on the
presumption of favorable fiscal and monetary policy developments.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates in 1993 that it had established on a tentative basis
at its meeting on June 30-July 1, 1992. The tentative ranges included
expansion of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt had been set provisionally at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1993.
All of these ranges were unchanged from those that the Committee had
set for 1992 at its meeting in February of last year and had reaffirmed at mid-year. When the provisional ranges for money growth were
established, the Committee had noted that they were especially
tentative and subject to revision in the latter part of 1992 or early
1993 owing to the considerable uncertainty about the evolving
relationship of money to income.
In the event, the velocities of M2 and M3 had increased
appreciably in the second half of 1992 and analysis of the factors
behind this development suggested further increases in the year ahead.
Consequently, in the Committee's discussion, which tended to focus on
M2, all the members indicated that they could support a proposal to
lower the tentative ranges for growth of the broad monetary aggregates
by one-half percentage point for 1993. At the same time, a number of
members indicated that they preferred somewhat different ranges
including the retention of the tentative ranges, lowering the ranges
by more than the proposal, and widening or narrowing them. All the
members were in firm agreement that the purpose of the proposed
reductions was not to signal or implement any change in monetary
policy or to convey any intention to move away from the Committee's
commitment to maximum sustainable economic expansion. Rather, the
reductions were motivated by the persistence of marked shortfalls in
the growth of M2 and M3 from their historical relationships with
various measures of aggregate economic performance; those shortfalls
appeared to be the technical result of forces that are altering the
relationship between money and income. Members of the Committee urged
that the Board's report to Congress and the Chairman's accompanying
testimony make clear the reasons for the unusual behavior of money and
its consequences for the Committee's choice of ranges.
The deviations in monetary growth from historical norms
reflected a number of developments whose relative importance and
intensity had shifted to some extent over the course of recent years,
but in general they had served to rechannel funds away from depository
institutions, and the associated weakness in deposit growth had raised
velocity--the ratio of nominal GDP to money. The result was the need
for lower money growth than in the past to support a given rate of
income growth. Among the developments that had tended to retard the
relative growth of M2 and M3 was the unprecedented steepness of the
yield curve that had prompted large shifts of funds by savers from M2
accounts to higher-yielding intermediate- and long-term assets. At
the same time, credit growth at bank and thrift depository
institutions had been weak, partly as a result of efforts by these
institutions to improve capital and liquidity positions, and partly
owing to weak demand. As a consequence, they also had maintained
relatively low offering rates on deposits that had provided consumers
with an incentive to reduce or hold down their deposit holdings in
order to pay down relatively high cost mortgages and other debts. In
1992, sluggish growth of M2 and M3 had been associated with a
considerable acceleration in nominal spending. Indeed, despite growth
of both M2 and M3 at rates below the Committee's ranges, the expansion
of the economy had exceeded most forecasts.
The members generally anticipated that the intensity of these
forces might diminish in 1993 as borrowers and lending institutions
achieved more comfortable balance sheet positions. Nonetheless, the
relative weakness in money growth was seen as likely to persist to a
marked extent. The yield curve, while it had flattened a bit
recently, was still expected to provide a considerable incentive for
many savers to shift funds out of M2 assets, especially as relatively
high-yielding time deposits continued to mature. In addition, banks
were likely to remain generally unaggressive in bidding for deposits,
in part because their substantial earlier acquisitions of securities
would permit them to accommodate some of the anticipated growth in
loan demand by selling securities or limiting purchases. In these
circumstances, restrained money growth seemed likely to remain
consistent with relative strength in the economic expansion.
The members recognized that the strength of the factors that
were expected to continue to depress broad money growth in relation to
income in 1993 was still subject to considerable uncertainty, and this
implied the need for flexibility in assessing the implications of
money growth relative to the Committee's ranges. Should the factors
influencing the behavior of the broad aggregates persist in holding
down money growth to the extent seen in 1992, expansion of M2 and M3
in the lower portion of their reduced ranges would be consistent with
considerable further growth in nominal spending. Indeed, a shortfall
from the reduced ranges could not be ruled out, and one member felt
that the potential for such a development warranted consideration of a
somewhat larger reduction in the M2 range; such a reduction also would
signal more clearly the Committee's commitment to price stability. On
the other hand, the upper portions of the reduced ranges would still
accommodate an ample provision of liquidity to support further
economic expansion even if the growth of money and of income were to
move toward an historically more normal alignment and velocity were to
slow from its high rate of increase. In one view, widening the
tentative M2 range by reducing its lower limit while retaining its
upper limit would help the Committee to convey its views regarding the
potential for a continuing but acceptable sluggishness in M2 growth
while leaving room for the possibility of faster M2 expansion should
changing circumstances foster diminishing strength in velocity.
Another member expressed a preference for narrowing the tentative
range by lowering only its upper limit as a means of signaling the
Committee's intent to resist both inflationary and recessionary
developments. In light of the uncertainties that were involved, the
informational content of the aggregates probably had diminished and in
any event the Committee would need to continue to evaluate monetary
growth developments in the context of a careful assessment of a wide
variety of other financial, economic, and price developments. In this
connection, one member observed that the uncertainties were of such a
magnitude that, while plausible arguments could be made for a number
of different ranges, retention of the tentative ranges would be
appropriate in light of the Committee's willingness to review the
ranges in the event that unanticipated developments were to unfold.
All of the members agreed that it would be desirable to
retain the monitoring range of 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent that the
Committee had established on a provisional basis for the growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt in 1993. The expansion in such debt
had not been damped by special forces to the same extent as the broad
monetary aggregates in 1992. Over the year ahead, growth in the
federal debt was likely to remain substantial, and the expansion of
debt in the nonfederal sectors was projected to accelerate somewhat
given the continued improvement in borrower balance sheets and an
anticipated increase in the willingness of financial institutions to
lend as the economy continued to expand. Nonetheless, in the context
of still cautious attitudes on the part of both borrowers and lenders,
the growth of nonfederal debt probably would remain below that of
nominal GDP in the year ahead.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all of the
members indicated that they favored or could accept a technical
downward adjustment of one-half percentage point in the tentative
ranges for the broader monetary aggregates for 1993 to rates of 2 to 6
percent for M2 and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent for M3. It was agreed that
there should be no change from the tentative range for total domestic
nonfinancial debt. In keeping with the Committee's usual procedures
under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the ranges would be reviewed at
midyear, or sooner if deemed necessary, in light of the growth and
velocity behavior of the aggregates and ongoing economic and financial
developments. Accordingly, by unanimous vote, the following longer-run policy for 1993 was approved by the Committee for inclusion in the
domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
2 to 6 percent and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth
quarter of 1993. The Committee expects that developments contributing to unusual velocity increases are
likely to persist during the year. The monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
Turning to policy for the intermeeting period ahead, all of the
members endorsed a proposal to maintain unchanged conditions in
reserve markets, and all indicated that they could accept a directive
that did not incorporate any presumption with regard to the likely
direction of possible intermeeting adjustments to policy. While there
was concern about the weakness in the monetary aggregates, the members
generally agreed that recent economic developments tended to reinforce
the view that monetary policy was on an appropriate course. The
economy seemed to be on a stronger growth track than earlier in the
expansion, and inflation remained quite subdued--only a bit above some
estimates of price stability--and likely to moderate further in coming
quarters in the view of most members. Some commented that a further
easing move at this juncture might well have adverse effects on
inflation sentiment and on interest rates in intermediate- and long-term debt markets. A few referred to the recent firming in some
commodity prices and the consensus among private forecasters that
inflation could drift higher over the next few years. In the view of
one member, these developments might argue for a tilt in the directive
toward possible restraint, but they did not call for an immediate
tightening in reserve conditions.
A staff analysis prepared for this meeting suggested a resumption
of some growth in the broad measures of money later in the first
quarter but a decline in both M2 and M3 for the quarter as a whole.
While part of the declines appeared to reflect difficulties
with seasonal adjustments and the ebbing of special factors that
previously had boosted growth, the uncertainties surrounding the
behavior of these aggregates tended to reduce their role in current
monetary policy. Nevertheless, there was concern about the
persisting weakness in the broad aggregates, including the likelihood
that they would fall well short of the Committee's new ranges over the
first part of the year. Some members also noted that the growth of
Ml, while still fairly robust in December and January, was markedly
below its pace over most of 1992. On the other hand, bank loans had
increased in recent months, and the weakness in the monetary
aggregates did not appear to reflect underlying softness in the
economy. In these circumstances, a number of members believed that
any effort to stimulate monetary growth under immediately prevailing
economic conditions and market expectations might well prove to be
counterproductive. An easing at this time could accelerate outflows
from interest-sensitive M2 assets if the easing were seen as signaling
a weakening of the System's anti-inflationary resolve and were to
result in higher rates on intermediate- and long-term debt securities.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all of the
members indicated that they favored a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
They also noted their preference for, or acceptance of, a directive
that did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustment to policy over the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
little change in the levels of M2 and M3 over the two-month period
from January through March.
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
authorized and directed, until otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the
following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting indicates
that economic activity rose appreciably further in the
fourth quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employment
registered another small increase in December, and the
civilian unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent.
Industrial production posted solid gains over the
closing months of the year. Retail sales were up
substantially in the fourth quarter, and residential
construction activity increased sharply. Indicators of
business fixed investment suggest a notable gain in
recent months, particularly for producers' durable
equipment. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit
narrowed slightly in October-November from its average
rate in the third quarter. Recent data on wages and
prices have been mixed but they continue to suggest on
balance a trend toward lower inflation.
Interest rates have declined somewhat since the
Committee meeting on December 22. In foreign exchange
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in
terms of the other G-10 currencies rose on balance over
the intermeeting period.
M2 appears to have contracted in December and
January, after expanding at a moderate pace over the
course of previous months; M3 is estimated to have
declined appreciably in both months. From the fourth
quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992, both M2
and M3 grew at rates somewhat below the lower ends of
the Committee's annual ranges for 1992. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt appears to have expanded at the lower
end of the Committee's monitoring range for the year.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
2 to 6 percent and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth
quarter of 1993. The Committee expects that developments contributing to unusual velocity increases are
likely to persist during the year. The monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with little change in M2 and M3 over the period from
January to March.
At this meeting the Committee discussed a preliminary report of a
subcommittee that had been established to examine various issues
relating to the release of information about Committee meetings and
decisions. All of the members agreed that the Committee should keep
the public as fully informed as possible about its monetary policy
decisions and their rationale. Such information could reduce
uncertainty about the stance of policy and about the factors the
Committee takes into account in reaching its decisions. However,
release of information should not be allowed to compromise the
overriding objective of making and implementing the best possible
decisions. In that regard, the Committee noted that its deliberative
process requires a free flow of ideas, including the ability to
advance or question hypotheses, to speculate on alternative outcomes,
and to change opinions in response to the views expressed by other
members. The members also needed to feel at liberty during meetings
to use a wide array of information that is obtained on a confidential
basis; at least some of that information would no longer be provided
to the Committee if there were a risk of public disclosure. Moreover,
the Committee wanted to give further consideration to the risk that
the adoption of a different schedule for releasing information about
policy decisions might have the effect, in difficult circumstances, of
reducing its willingness to make needed policy adjustments promptly.
No decisions were made at this meeting concerning various options for
apprising the public more fully or promptly of the Committee's
actions, and it was understood that the subcommittee would continue to
study the matter.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, March 23, 1993.
The meeting adjourned.
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007