FRB: FOMC Minutes--September 21, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of September 21, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 21, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, and
Goodfriend, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Richmond, respectively
Messrs. Judd, King, and Ms. White, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,
Atlanta, and New York, respectively
Mr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on August 17, 1993, were approved.
By unanimous vote, Joan E. Lovett and Peter R. Fisher were
selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities
of Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account, and
Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account respectively, on the understanding that their selection was subject to their
being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Secretary's Note: Advice subsequently was received
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets and on System transactions in foreign
currencies during the period August 17, 1993, through September 20,
1993. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
Ms. Betsy B. White, Vice President for Domestic Operations of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, reported on developments in
domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions in
government securities and federal agency obligations during the period
August 17, 1993,  through September 20, 1993. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the formulation of monetary policy for the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed by the Committee at this meeting
suggested that economic activity, adjusted for the temporary
depressing effects of the flood in the Midwest, was continuing to
expand at a moderate pace. Consumer spending was up, and business
purchases of durable equipment had recorded further healthy gains. On
the other hand, housing activity had shown a muted response to the
declines in mortgage rates that had occurred through the spring, and
gains in manufacturing output and in employment had been limited in
recent months. After rising at an accelerated rate in the early part
of the year, consumer prices had increased more slowly in recent
months and producer prices had fallen.
Total nonfarm payroll employment edged lower in August after
a sizable gain in July. Hiring in the service-producing sectors,
especially in health and business services, was down in August from
the pace of recent months, and more jobs were lost in manufacturing.
Construction employment also moved lower, retracing part of the July
increase. On the other hand, the average workweek rose to a
relatively high level in August, and as a result, aggregate hours
worked by production or nonsupervisory workers were significantly
above the second-quarter average. The civilian unemployment rate
declined to 6.7 percent.
Industrial production posted a further moderate gain in
August. Manufacturing output more than accounted for the increase, as
strikes damped mining production and utilities output was unchanged
following large gains in earlier months. Within manufacturing, the
output of motor vehicles and parts was unchanged. Excluding the motor
vehicle component, another sharp gain in computers and related
electronic components boosted the production of business equipment,
while the output of consumer goods declined as a result of a
retrenchment in appliance production following the advance posted in
July. Total utilization of manufacturing capacity edged up again in
August.
Total retail sales were little changed in real terms in July
and August. Despite the recent sluggishness, however, real spending
for goods in July and August was appreciably above the level in the
second quarter. In addition, real expenditures for services had grown
rapidly in July; this reflected both high energy consumption
associated with unusually hot weather and robust spending for other
services. The persistence of hot weather through August suggested
that spending on energy services continued at a high level for that
month. After a slight decline in July, housing starts rose
substantially in August. Single-family starts accounted for all of
the August increase, as multifamily starts fell further and continued
to hover around their thirty-year low.
Growth in real business fixed investment appeared to be
slowing in the third quarter from the robust pace earlier in the year.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods dropped substantially in July,
with all of the decline occurring in the volatile aircraft component.
For capital goods other than aircraft and parts, shipments again moved
higher in July; while the demand for computing equipment strengthened
after dropping off somewhat in the second quarter, shipments of other
types of durable equipment softened. In addition, heavy-truck sales
were off substantially in July after advancing steadily since late
1992, and fleet sales of light vehicles were down in July and August.
Investment in nonresidential structures posted its largest advance in
three years in the second quarter. However, construction activity
fell in July in reflection of a sharp decline in the construction of
commercial structures other than offices.
Business inventories contracted sharply in July after
changing little in June. The bulk of the July decline occurred in the
retail sector and reflected drawdowns in inventories at automobile
dealerships. Non-auto retail inventories edged down in July; with
sales flat, the ratio of non-auto inventories to sales remained near
the high end of the range for the past several years. In the
wholesale trade sector, stocks were trimmed somewhat further in July,
but the inventory-to-sales ratio remained at the midpoint of its range
over the past three years. Manufacturing stocks were unchanged in
July after a small reduction in June. With shipments down in July
owing to weak shipments of aircraft and motor vehicles, the stocks-to-sales ratio rebounded in July but was still at a low level.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit decreased in July,
but it remained essentially unchanged from its average rate in the
second quarter. The value of exports edged lower in July, while the
value of imports fell by more, retracing nearly all of the sizable
June rise. The decline in imports was primarily in automotive
products, consumer goods, and oil. The performance of the major
foreign industrial economies continued to present a mixed picture.
Economic activity in Japan, after increasing slightly in the first
quarter, evidenced renewed weakness in the second quarter that
apparently persisted into the third quarter. In western Germany, real
output rose in the second quarter, but much of the gain apparently
stemmed from unintended inventory accumulation. In France and Italy,
economic activity appeared to have leveled out in the second quarter
after declining earlier. By contrast, both the United Kingdom and
Canada recorded further modest gains in economic activity.
Producer prices of finished goods fell sharply further in
August; higher prices for consumer foods were more than offset by
lower prices for the energy and the nonfood, non-energy components of
the index. For finished goods other than food and energy, producer
prices increased over the twelve months ended in August by a
considerably smaller amount than in the previous twelve-month period.
Consumer prices rose a little faster in August than in July, with an
increase in food prices counterbalancing a decline in prices of
consumer energy goods. For nonfood, non-energy items, consumer prices
advanced over the twelve months ended in August by an amount
comparable to that recorded for the twelve months ended in August
1992. Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
were up in August after little change on balance in June and July; the
rise reflected in part overtime earnings in manufacturing. Over the
twelve months ended in August, this measure of earnings increased by
about the same amount as in the previous twelve-month period.
At its meeting on August 17, 1993, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that, in contrast to the two previous
directives, did not include a tilt toward possible firming of reserve
conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive
indicated that in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives
for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser
reserve restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
The reserve conditions associated with this directive were expected to
be consistent with modest growth of M2 and little net change in M3
over the balance of the third quarter.
Open market operations were directed during the intermeeting
period toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. The federal funds rate remained close to 3 percent over
the period, while adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged somewhat
above anticipated levels, reflecting demand for adjustment credit by
banks experiencing temporary technical difficulties.
Other short-term interest rates were little changed on
balance over the intermeeting period, while yields on intermediate-
and long-term debt obligations declined somewhat. The drop in longer-term yields appeared to be associated with incoming data indicating
continuing sluggishness in economic activity and the more favorable
performance of broad measures of prices. Major indexes of stock
prices increased somewhat further over the intermeeting period,
evidently reflecting lower bond yields and heavy inflows to stock
mutual funds.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies depreciated on balance
over the intermeeting period. Much of the dollar's decline reflected
the strength of the mark and other European currencies, which was
related in part to the unexpectedly slow pace of monetary easing in
Germany and other European countries. Against the yen, the dollar
rebounded early in the intermeeting period from the historical low
that occurred around the time of the Committee's August meeting. The
dollar was buoyed by joint central bank sales of yen against the
dollar and by the accompanying public statement from the U.S. Treasury
that was seen by market participants as signaling a new attitude
toward any further appreciation of the yen. On September 21, the
dollar rose sharply on news that President Yeltsin had dissolved the
Russian Parliament.
Growth of M2 continued at a slow rate in August. The
sluggishness in this aggregate, which occurred despite further rapid
expansion in its Ml component, apparently reflected ongoing efforts by
households to shift funds away from depository accounts in search of
better returns. M3 turned up after declining in June and July;
however, expansion of this aggregate continued to be held down by
declines in institution-only money market funds. For the year through
August, M2 and M3 were estimated to have grown at rates close to the
lower ends of the Committee's ranges for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt had expanded moderately in recent months, and for
the year through July it was estimated to have increased at a rate in
the lower half of the Committee's monitoring range.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested
moderate growth in economic activity and limited reductions in margins
of unemployed labor and capital through next year. Fiscal restraint,
uncertainty about other government policies, and slow growth of
foreign industrial economies over the near term would act as a
constraint on the economy. However, improving balance-sheet positions
and credit supply conditions were lifting an unusual constraint on
spending, and the lower interest rates would encourage further
increases in consumer spending, housing construction, and business
fixed investment. The continued slack in labor and product markets,
coupled with some tempering of inflation expectations, was expected to
foster further reductions in wage and price inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, members commented that recent developments had
not altered their outlook for moderate and sustained expansion in
economic activity. The members acknowledged that the interpretation
of ongoing developments presented some unusual problems, notably the
difficulty of reconciling the appreciable growth in employment thus
far this year with the slow expansion in measured output: the
associated drop in measured productivity was especially surprising in
light of the business drive toward more efficient operations.
Moreover, the economic outlook clearly remained subject to a variety
of uncertainties, including potential developments abroad that were
especially difficult to predict. Nonetheless, while temporary factors
were likely to depress third-quarter expansion, the members saw little
in the current statistical or anecdotal reports on the domestic
economy that pointed to the likelihood of a significant deviation from
a moderate growth trend. It was noted in this connection that the
inhibiting effects of increased fiscal restraint and expected further
weakness in net exports needed to be weighed against the favorable
effects on interest-sensitive spending of considerably reduced
intermediate- and long-term interest rates and the much improved
financial condition of many business firms and households. With
regard to the outlook for inflation, some members suggested that the
prospects for continued slack in resource utilization were consistent
with a disinflationary trend, but the disparate factors bearing on the
outlook for inflation as well as the swings in price performance
experienced in recent quarters argued for caution in assessing the
future course of inflation.
In their review of developments around the nation, members
commented that business conditions remained uneven across local areas
and industries, but they characterized general economic activity in
most regions as ranging from little change to moderate growth since
mid-summer. However, business conditions continued to be quite weak
in some areas, notably in California, and business sentiment appeared
to have remained cautious in much of the nation. One member
emphasized uneven conditions of a different kind. Relatively
disadvantaged members of the population, often living in inner cities,
had high and rising expectations about their economic prospects. At
the same time, however, some traditional paths of upward mobility were
being cut back, such as the military and civil service within the
government and office jobs more generally. In addition, regulations
aimed at correcting some problems in financial institutions--such as
real estate appraisal and downpayment requirements--were having
unintended adverse effects on lower-income businesses and households,
and other proposals aimed at promoting minority lending were in danger
of promising more than they could deliver. An apparently widening gap
between economic realities and aspirations might not have measurable
implications for the macroeconomic outlook over short periods of time,
but they reflected a worrisome trend in terms of the longer-run health
of the economy.
In other comments, members referred to a number of financial
developments that had favorable implications for sustained economic
expansion. Business firms and consumers had made substantial progress
in strengthening their balance sheets, and while the process of
adjusting balance sheets evidently was still under way, the material
improvement accomplished thus far had diminished financial risks and
constraints on spending. Banking institutions had bolstered their
capital positions and were in a better position to accommodate
increases in loan demand. Bond and stock markets had exhibited
considerable strength. In this connection, however, a few members
commented on the apparently growing concern in financial markets that
current equity prices were high relative to earnings and dividends.
A correction in U.S. equity markets could trigger cumulative selling,
especially by mutual funds, which had garnered substantial new
investors, some of whom might not fully appreciate the risks of their
new assets relative to deposits. On the positive side, there were
good reasons for optimism on the trajectory of business profits in an
environment of low inflation and moderate growth. Moreover, some
managers of mutual funds reportedly were taking steps to strengthen
the liquidity of their portfolios, and members reported on efforts to
improve individual investor awareness of the risks of equity
investments.
During their review of the prospective performance of key
sectors of the economy, members gave somewhat mixed reports on retail
sales in recent weeks, but they generally anticipated that consumer
spending would provide continued if not strong support to sustained
economic expansion. As had been true for an extended period, consumer
attitudes remained hesitant in the context of concerns about
employment and income prospects and, in the case of many consumers
with higher incomes, increased income tax liabilities. Some members
expressed the view that more vigorous growth in employment might well
occur as the expansion matured, and such a development would be likely
to have a favorable effect on consumer attitudes and spending.
Cautious attitudes also appeared to have held back housing
demand and construction activity despite declines in mortgage interest
rates. The combination of some further declines in mortgage interest
rates recently and a tendency for house prices to stabilize or even to
firm in some markets seemed to have induced appreciable and widespread
strengthening in demand for single-family housing. Indeed, despite
persisting weakness in some areas, housing markets were described as
quite strong in many parts of the country, and the overall improvement
in housing activity might not be captured in the latest statistics.
Other construction activity appeared on the whole to have bottomed out
and might have begun to trend higher. Anecdotal reports suggested a
pickup in the volume of commercial property transactions, though
apparently not yet in the prices of commercial properties in most
areas, and rising construction outlays were anticipated for
commercial, industrial, and institutional facilities as economic
activity continued to expand. Office construction was likely to
remain generally depressed as excess capacity continued to be
absorbed, but such construction might not decline further. Members
also anticipated appreciable further growth in business spending for
equipment, notably for the purpose of enhancing productivity in an
environment of strong competitive pressures; concurrently, spending to
expand capacity seemed likely to remain relatively limited unless
consumer spending gathered more momentum in coming quarters than was
now anticipated. On balance, business fixed investment was expected
to continue to provide considerable support to the economic expansion.
The passage of deficit-reduction legislation in July implied
increased fiscal restraint but also appeared to have improved
confidence in financial markets and in the business community more
generally regarding the ability of the federal government to enact
needed legislation. At the same time,  the new taxes stemming from
that legislation and a greater focus on the potential for further
legislation, notably health care reform and its implications for
mandated business costs, were a key factor in sustaining cautious
attitudes among business executives. Members also referred to the
constraining effects in many areas, and on the economy more generally,
of current and prospective cutbacks in defense expenditures, spending
curbs by state and local governments, and the outlook for further tax
increases by many of these governments.
The prospects for net exports also were cited as a negative
factor in the economic outlook. Expectations of persisting weakness
in some major foreign economies implied relatively limited growth in
U.S. exports in a period when moderate expansion in this country was
likely to foster somewhat more rapid increases in U.S. imports.
Some members also commented that the controversial NAFTA legislation
under consideration in the Congress continued to dominate business
discussions in parts of the country. It was suggested that whatever
its eventual benefits for the three nations immediately involved might
be, a defeat of that legislation could prove to be a setback for the
GATT negotiations with dislocative implications for world trade.
Many members referred to the more favorable price developments that had occurred since the early part of the year when key
measures of inflation had surged. While it was premature to conclude
that a distinct disinflationary trend had been re-established, the
members generally agreed that price pressures were likely to remain
subdued given their projections of some continuing slack in resource
utilization. Favorable developments tending to support that
conclusion included the persistence of intensely competitive
conditions in most markets for goods around the country. The costs of
materials purchased by business firms generally were reported to be
rising only slowly, if at all. There were indications of fairly tight
labor markets in some areas, but wage pressures remained limited even
in those markets. At the same time, the costs of worker benefits
continued to rise fairly rapidly and many business contacts were
expressing concern about the possibility of further mandated cost
increases related to the health care reform legislation. For the next
several months, relatively rapid increases in food prices associated
with weather-related crop losses and an increase in the excise tax on
gasoline would tend to boost consumer prices. On balance, these
developments were not seen as inconsistent with longer-run progress
toward price stability, though the inflation outlook remained subject
to considerable uncertainty.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all of the members agreed that recent economic and
financial developments pointed to the desirability of an unchanged
policy stance. The members recognized that neither the pace of the
economic expansion nor the uncertain progress toward price stability
reflected a wholly satisfactory economic performance, but at this
point the present posture of monetary policy continued to offer the
best promise in their view of promoting sustained economic growth in
the context of subdued if not declining inflation.
From the perspective of a variety of financial measures, the
current monetary policy continued quite accommodative. Short-term
interest rates were low, indeed close to zero after adjustment for
inflation, and there had been appreciable further declines in longer-term interest rates. Growth of M2 remained slow, but it had picked up
since earlier in the year, and M3 had expanded in August, albeit at a
sluggish rate, after declining in previous months. One member
observed that growth in M2, adjusted to include certain stock and bond
mutual funds, was estimated to have accelerated since early spring to
a fairly healthy pace. Narrow measures of money and reserves, though
subject to a variety of influences, were growing at rates that
suggested an ample provision of liquidity to the economy.
In considering possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, all of the members endorsed a proposal to retain
a symmetrical directive. While current economic uncertainties were
mirrored in uncertainties about the future course of monetary policy, the members agreed that developments in the period until the next
meeting in mid-November were not likely to call for any adjustment to
policy. Beyond the nearer term, however, both the timing and, in the
view of at least some members, the direction of the next policy change
could not be foreseen at this time. While they did not see convincing
evidence that monetary policy was overly stimulative at this point,
some members were concerned the current stance, as reflected in short-term interest rates, was quite accommodative and probably would need
to be firmed at some point. These members stressed the need to remain
especially alert to potential inflationary developments against the
background of persisting inflationary expectations and uncertain
progress toward price stability. Other members, while sharing this
concern to an extent, gave some weight to the possibility that the
expansion might remain quite sluggish for a period; under the
circumstances, they foresaw the need to maintain an accommodative
policy posture and could not rule out the possibility that the next
policy move might have to be toward greater monetary stimulus.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated their support of a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. According to a staff
analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting were
expected to be consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over the
balance of the year.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity is continuing to expand at a
moderate pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment edged
down in August after a sizable gain in July, but the
average workweek rose to a relatively high level and
the civilian unemployment rate declined to 6.7 percent.
Industrial production has advanced moderately over
recent months. Retail sales changed little in real
terms in July and August after increasing appreciably
in the second quarter. Housing starts were down
slightly in July but rose substantially in August.
Available indicators suggest a slowing in the expansion
of business capital spending from a robust pace earlier
in the year. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade
deficit was about unchanged in July from its average
rate in the second quarter. After rising at an
accelerated rate in the early part of the year,
consumer prices have increased more slowly and producer
prices have fallen in recent months.
Short-term interest rates have changed little
since the Committee meeting on August 17, while yields
on intermediate and long-term debt obligations have
declined somewhat. In foreign exchange markets, the
trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies depreciated substantially over
the intermeeting period.
M2 continued to expand at a slow rate in August,
while M3 turned up after declining in June and July.
For the year through August, M2 and M3 are estimated
to have grown at rates close to the lower end of the
Committee's ranges for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has expanded at a moderate rate in
recent months, and for the year through July it is
estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For 1994, the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of the
year.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare.
Lindsey, McTeer, Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and
Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, November 16, 1993.
The meeting adjourned at 12:35 p.m.
During the intermeeting period, available members
participated in three telephone conference calls to discuss issues
relating to the release of information about discussions at Federal
Open Market Committee meetings. These calls were prompted by hearings
on such issues that were held by the House Committee on Banking,
Finance, and Urban Affairs. The discussions took into account
information that unedited transcripts for meetings since early 1976
were maintained by the FOMC secretariat at the Board of Governors.
The members did not reach any decisions on these matters during these
conferences. In the course of two further telephone conferences
during the intermeeting period, the Committee reviewed economic and
financial developments affecting Mexico and discussed various
contingencies that might involve the Federal Reserve.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007