FRB: FOMC Minutes--July 6-7, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of July 6-7, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 6, 1993, at 2:30 p.m. and continued
on Wednesday, July 7, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan. Chairman
Mr. Mullins1
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Oltman2
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan. Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Small,3 and Whitesell,4 Section Chiefs,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Kusko,4 Senior Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics. Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, T. Davis, Goodfriend, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco. Cleveland,
Kansas City, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston,
Messrs. Coughlin and Guentner, Assistant Vice Presidents.
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and New York,
respectively
1. Acting Vice Chairman in Mr. Corrigan's absence.
2. First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, attending as
alternate member for Mr. Corrigan.
3. Attended portion of meeting relating to a discussion of the uses
of a broad monetary aggregate that includes bond and stock mutual
funds.
4. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion
of the economic outlook and its longer-run growth objectives for
monetary and debt aggregates.
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on May 18, 1993, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System transactions in
foreign currencies during the period May 18, 1993, through July 6,
1993. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations reported on
developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market
transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations
during the period May 18, 1993, through July 6, 1993. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in 1993 and 1994,
and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period
ahead. A summary of the economic and financial information available
at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion is
provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was
approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting provided a mixed
reading on the economy, but on balance the available data suggested
that the expansion had picked up somewhat during the second quarter
from the very slow pace of the first quarter. Employment statistics,
while tending to soften in June, pointed to considerable strength for
the second quarter as a whole, although recent spending indicators
suggested a much more moderate expansion. Consumer and producer price
inflation slowed substantially in May, but prices had risen at a
faster rate over the first five months of the year than over the
second half of 1992.
Total nonfarm payroll employment changed little in June after
registering substantial gains in April and May. For the second
quarter as a whole, the increase in employment matched that of the
first quarter. Manufacturing employment, which was about unchanged
over the first quarter, declined somewhat in June for a third straight
month. Construction payrolls edged lower after rising appreciably
over the preceding two months, and job gains in the services
industries were considerably smaller in June than those recorded
earlier in the year. The civilian unemployment rate backed up to 7.0
percent in June.
Industrial production increased in May at the relatively
subdued rate recorded in March and April; for June, the limited data
available suggested a modest decline in output. In May, assemblies of
motor vehicles declined after holding steady over the two previous
months. Among other manufactured goods, the production of business
equipment, led by computers and industrial equipment, recorded another
brisk advance whereas the output of non-auto consumer goods continued
to expand sluggishly. Total utilization of industrial capacity was
unchanged in May for a third straight month.
Real personal consumption expenditures edged higher in May
after a sizable rebound in April from weather-related weakness. On
balance, however, consumer spending had increased only slightly thus
far this year. Outlays for new cars and light trucks advanced in May
to their highest level since January 1990 and apparently remained near
that elevated level in June. In addition, spending for non-energy
services had increased substantially in recent months. By contrast,
energy consumption had fallen from the especially high levels of late
winter, and outlays for nondurable goods in May were still below their
fourth-quarter level. Housing starts increased in April and May from
a depressed first-quarter pace, with most of the rise attributable to
starts of single-family dwellings.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods in May retraced only a
portion of a sizable April decline. However, for the two months
combined, shipments of such goods were above the average for the first
quarter and apparently remained on an upward trend that began early in
1992. The upward trajectory for spending on machinery and on electrical and communications equipment seemed to have reflected improved
cash flows for the business sector and a declining cost of capital,
and incoming data suggested that outlays for business equipment would
increase further over the months ahead. Nonresidential construction
activity was unchanged over the first quarter but picked up slightly
on balance over April and May. Office building rose over the two
months, while construction of non-office commercial structures was
little changed and industrial building activity was down sharply.
Business inventories recorded another appreciable rise in
April, and available data pointed to a further increase in May. In
manufacturing, inventory accumulation stepped up in April and May
after changing little in the first quarter: the ratio of stocks to
shipments edged higher in each month and was only slightly above the
very low level reached early in 1993. In the wholesale trade sector, inventories advanced at a slower rate in May than in April, and the
inventory-to-sales ratio fell to the low end of the range for the past
three years. The buildup of retail inventories slowed considerably in
April, and with sales rebounding from the effect of March storms, the
inventory-to-sales ratio declined for the retail sector. Nonetheless,
the ratio still was near the high end of its range for the past
several years.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit for April was
unchanged from March, with both imports and exports declining
slightly. However, the April deficit was substantially above the
average for the first quarter, reflecting sizable increases in imports
of capital goods, automotive products, consumer goods, and oil. The
value of exports in April was only slightly above the first-quarter
average. Recent indicators pointed to further weakness in economic
activity in continental Europe thus far this year. By contrast,
economic recovery appeared to be continuing in the United Kingdom and
Canada. In Japan, economic activity was up appreciably in the first
quarter, but available data suggested that this strength had not
carried over to the second quarter.
Changes in producer and consumer prices were small in May
following sizable increases earlier in the year. Producer prices of
finished goods were unchanged in May, as declines in prices of
finished consumer food and energy products offset small advances in
prices of other finished goods. Excluding the food and energy
components, producer prices had risen more rapidly thus far in 1993
than they had in the second half of 1992. At the consumer level,
prices of items other than food and energy rose only slightly in May,
but this measure of inflation also had risen faster this year than in
the second half of last year. Labor costs likewise had evidenced a
quickened pace of increases this year. Average hourly earnings of
production or nonsupervisory workers rose substantially in May after
edging lower in April, and these earnings had grown more rapidly over
the first five months of 1993 than over the preceding six months.
At its meeting on May 18, the Committee adopted a directive
that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions but that included a tilt toward possible firming of reserve
conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive
indicated that in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives
for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable
or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with appreciable growth of
the broader monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. Several upward adjustments were made to expected
levels of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing during the period in
anticipation of stepped-up demand for seasonal credit during the crop-growing season: borrowing averaged near expected levels over the
period. The federal funds rate remained close to 3 percent over the
period, although quarter-end pressures in money markets pushed the
rate higher for a brief period at the end of June.
Other short-term interest rates also were little changed on
balance over the period since the May meeting. Early in the period,
unexpectedly robust employment data for May, coupled with media
reports about the monetary policy stance adopted at the May meeting,
led to some upward pressure on money market interest rates.
Subsequently, however, this pressure abated in response to the release
of data suggesting slower inflation and a somewhat weaker outlook for
the economy. These developments along with the progress in the
Congress toward adoption of a deficit-reduction package fostered a
decline in bond yields: buoyed by the drop in yields, major indexes of
stock prices rose over the intermeeting period in spite of
disappointing second-quarter earnings reports by several major
companies.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies increased on balance over
the intermeeting period. After depreciating somewhat through the end
of May, the dollar recovered in early June when U.S. money market
interest rates moved higher. The dollar rose more strongly over the
last half of June, principally in response to actual and expected
monetary easing abroad. The rise in the dollar over the intermeeting
interval reflected sizable appreciations against European currencies,
especially the German mark. The dollar continued to fall against the
Japanese yen through the middle of June, in the process setting
several new lows, before recovering a little over the remainder of the
period.
After contracting during the first quarter, M2 and M3
expanded appreciably over the second quarter. Most of this growth,
which was especially pronounced in May, reflected strength in Ml and
occurred despite continued heavy outflows to bond and equity funds.
The May surge resulted in part from a strong pickup in mortgage
refinancing activity and a reversal of the depressing effect in April
of relatively damped individual nonwithheld tax payments on the
seasonally adjusted level of liquid deposits. The growth of the
broader aggregates moderated substantially in June, and by more than
might have been suggested by the waning of these mortgage and tax
influences. For the year through June, growth of both M2 and M3 was
below the lower ends of the ranges for 1993 that the Committee had
established in February. This sluggishness reflected ongoing changes
in asset preferences and financing patterns rather than restrictive
financial conditions. The velocity of M2 was estimated to have
increased at a rate of about 4-1/2 percent over the first half of the
year after a 4 percent rise in 1992. Total domestic nonfinancial debt
expanded somewhat further through April.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested
moderate growth in economic activity and modest reductions in margins
of unemployed labor and capital through 1994. The projection assumed
the enactment of a federal budget bill that implied a moderately
restrictive fiscal policy over the forecast horizon. As in earlier
staff projections, lower interest rates were expected to support
appreciable gains in interest-sensitive expenditures, including
housing, consumer durables, and business equipment. Private spending
also would be buttressed by a favorable financial environment
associated with strengthened balance sheets and reduced debt burdens
and by the apparently increasing willingness of banking institutions
to make new loans. Export demand was likely to remain constrained
over the near term by the weakness in the economies of several major
industrial countries, but some improvement in foreign demand was
anticipated later as those economies started to strengthen. The
outlook for moderate growth and continuing slack in resource
utilization suggested considerably more subdued price increases than
had occurred in the early months of 1993.
In the Committee's discussion, the members generally agreed
that ongoing economic developments remained consistent with moderate
but sustained growth in economic activity. No sector of the economy
seemed poised at this juncture to provide strong impetus to the expansion, but a promising basis for further growth was seen in the much
improved financial condition of many households and business firms.
Lower long-term interest rates, which had contributed to the
improvement in balance sheets, were likely as well to bolster housing
and business capital spending more directly. While the expansion now
appeared to be firmly established, a number of members cautioned that
it was subject to some downside risks, notably those associated with
the still uncertain outlook for government budget and other policies.
The possibility of higher taxes, associated with the deficit reduction
legislation currently under consideration in the Congress and with the
forthcoming proposals for national health care reform, was widely
reported to be damping spending. With regard to the outlook for
inflation, the most recent data on prices offered some encouragement
that the earlier upturn in key measures of inflation might prove to be
temporary, especially in the context of still ample margins of
unutilized labor and other production resources. Even so, given
generally held expectations among the public that inflation was not
likely to decline and might in fact trend higher, many members
concluded that for now the disinflationary trend might have been
arrested or, at least, that further progress toward price stability
would be quite difficult to achieve over the next several quarters.
In conformance with the usual practice at meetings when the
Committee considers its longer-run objectives for growth of the
monetary and debt aggregates, the members of the Committee and the
Federal Reserve Bank presidents not currently serving as members
provided individual projections of growth in real and nominal GDP, the
rate of unemployment, and the rate of inflation for the years 1993 and
1994. In light of the experience in the first half of the year,
forecasts of real growth in 1993 had been revised down somewhat since
February, while projections of inflation had been raised. The central
tendency of the forecasts of the rate of expansion in real GDP in 1993
was now 2-1/4 to 2-3/4 percent for the year as a whole; for 1994,
these projections had a central tendency of 2-1/2 to 3-1/4 percent.
With regard to the expansion of nominal GDP, the forecasts converged
on growth rates of 5 to 5-3/4 percent for 1993 and 5 to 6-1/2 percent
for 1994. Given the projections of a moderate uptrend in economic
activity and expectations of some further gains in labor productivity,
the forecasts incorporated only a small decline in unemployment to
rates of around 6-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter of 1993 and only
slightly lower by the fourth quarter of 1994. For the rate of
inflation, as measured by the CPI, the projections had a central
tendency of 3 to 3-1/4 percent in 1993 and 3 to 3-1/2 percent in 1994, reflecting little change in both years from the rate of inflation
experienced in 1992.
Members commented that the improved prospects for significant
reductions in the federal deficit had played an important role in
fostering the declines in longer-term interest rates that had occurred
since the latter part of 1992: the lower rates were having positive
effects on spending decisions in a number of interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy as well as on balance sheets more generally.
At the same time, the prospects for higher taxes--accentuated by
uncertainties about their size and incidence--were widely reported to
be inhibiting spending decisions by business firms and might also be
adding to cautious consumer attitudes. Some of the anecdotal evidence
suggested that uncertainties associated with the potential impact of
the still unannounced proposals for health care reform were making
many businesses especially cautious, notably in their hiring
decisions. Adding to the effects of anticipated federal legislation
were concerns in various parts of the country about further cuts in
defense spending and the impact of additional reductions in state and
local expenditures or of increases in state and local taxes. Some
members observed that the fiscal policy legislation before the
Congress appeared to have generated a perhaps exaggerated degree of
concern, and passage of this legislation might have a generally
favorable effect on business and consumer sentiment.
Turning to the outlook for individual sectors of the economy,
members referred to indications of an upturn in consumer spending in
recent months, but they also noted that survey results and anecdotal
reports still suggested generally cautious consumer attitudes. The
prospects for increased taxes might be having some negative effect on
consumer confidence, but consumers remained especially concerned about
the outlook for jobs and incomes as defense cutbacks continued and
many firms, notably larger business establishments, took further steps
to restructure and downsize their operations. To an important extent
the improvement in retail sales in the second quarter was associated
with stronger sales of motor vehicles that, in the view of at least
some members, appeared to reflect previously postponed replacement
demand rather than a major shift in consumer attitudes. In any event,
moderate growth in consumer spending was likely to be maintained in
the context of the improved financial condition and the related
reduction in debt-service burdens of many households. Further growth
in overall employment, in line with that achieved in the first half of
the year, would if it persisted provide important support toward
sustaining the expansion of consumer spending and thus the growth of
the economy more generally.
With regard to the outlook for business fixed investment,
members reported that many firms were scaling back or putting on hold
their capital spending plans pending a resolution of the business tax
proposals under consideration in the Congress. Nonetheless, business
spending for equipment still constituted a relatively robust sector of
the economy, at least according to the data available to date. To a
considerable extent, such spending reflected ongoing efforts to
improve the quality of products and the efficiency of business operations while holding down the number of employees, and the members saw
this trend as likely to continue. In general, other business capital
spending had remained sluggish, although construction activity other
than office building appeared to have picked up in parts of the
country. The prospects for housing construction, though not
ebullient, were viewed as more promising particularly in light of the
declines in mortgage interest rates to relatively low levels. The
improved financial position of many potential homebuyers also provided
a basis for anticipating stronger housing markets. Despite these
favorable factors, however, overall housing activity had improved only
modestly in recent months as homebuyers tended to remain cautious, and
at least in some areas housing developers continued to report that
they were encountering difficulties in securing construction finance.
On balance, housing construction seemed likely to provide some impetus
to the expansion in coming quarters.
Relatively weak economic conditions in a number of foreign
industrial countries were likely to continue to limit U.S. exports,
which had declined since the end of 1992. Indeed, available data
supplemented by reports from a variety of contacts suggested that
business conditions had remained quite weak or had worsened in a
number of foreign industrial nations. Even so, business contacts in
some parts of the United States indicated that foreign demand for
their products was still quite robust. Business activity abroad,
which already was trending higher in a few industrial nations, was
viewed as likely to strengthen more generally over the year ahead,
with positive effects on overall U.S. exports.
Turning to the outlook for inflation, members commented that
despite favorable readings recently, a wide range of price and wage
data had suggested some acceleration in the rate of inflation during
the early months of the year. To some extent, the indications of
intensified inflation might have been the result of difficulties with
seasonal adjustments or other temporary factors, but there were
reports of some successful efforts by business firms to raise prices
following the spurt in demand and the rise in capacity utilization
toward the end of 1992. These price developments were disappointing
and suggested to many members that the disinflationary trend might
have been arrested, at least for now, though the economic fundamentals
remained consistent with a resumption of some further downward
movement in the rate of inflation. With regard to those fundamentals,
many members saw significant, albeit diminished, slack in labor and
product markets as likely to persist over the forecast horizon, given
their current forecasts of moderate expansion in economic activity.
Other favorable-factors in the inflation outlook included efforts by
businesses to hold down costs and increase productivity by restructuring their operations and investing in new, more productive
equipment. Unfortunately, these favorable elements in the underlying
economic situation seemed at odds with the apparently widely held view
by the public that inflation would not diminish and indeed was likely
to increase and that in any event current inflation levels were
tolerable. Such expectations and attitudes would tend to temper the
gains against inflation, if any, over the forecast horizon by their
effects on the pricing and wage behavior of business firms and
employees and the reactions of consumers toward rising prices. This
inflationary climate underscored the importance of credible government
policies--monetary, fiscal, trade, and regulatory--that encouraged
reduced inflation over time.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth in the monetary and
debt aggregates that it had established in February for 1993 and it
decided on tentative ranges for growth in those aggregates in 1994.
The current ranges for the period from the fourth quarter of 1992 to
the fourth quarter of 1993 included expansion of 2 to 6 percent for M2
and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent for M3. A monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent for 1993.
In the Committee's discussion, the members focused on the
issue of whether or not to lower the ranges further. In February, the
ranges for M2 and M3 had been reduced by 1/2 percentage point in the
expectation that continuing rechanneling of credit demands and savings
flows into securities markets and away from depository institutions
would result in further increases in velocity, the ratio of nominal
GDP to monetary measures such as M2 or M3. In fact, the strength of
these forces was underestimated to some extent. Substantial increases
occurred in the velocity of both M2 and M3, especially in the first
quarter, that were reflected in weak bank credit and huge inflows into
bond and stock mutual funds. In the circumstances, the expansion of
both aggregates through midyear was below the lower ends of the
reduced ranges established by the Committee for the year. According
to a staff analysis, the developments boosting M2 and M3 velocity
could be expected to persist over the balance of 1993. Such an
outcome would imply monetary growth for the year as a whole slightly
below the Committee's current ranges, even if the growth of nominal
GDP picked up in the second half of the year as implied by the central
tendency of the members' forecasts.
In light of this expectation, many of the members indicated
their support of a proposal to lower the M2 and M3 ranges further for
1993 and on a tentative basis to retain the reduced ranges for 1994.
It was emphasized during the discussion that the reductions were
intended solely as technical adjustments to reflect expected increases
in velocity and that the lower ranges did not imply any tightening of
monetary policy. Rather, the reductions in the ranges would serve to
align them with monetary growth rates that were more likely to be
associated with a satisfactory economic performance. Indeed, M2 and
M3 growth consistent with most members' forecasts might still leave
the expansion of those aggregates near the lower ends of their reduced
ranges for the year; at the same time, the probability of a surge in
monetary growth to levels above the new ranges appeared remote. In
this connection, some members commented that the uncertainties
surrounding the behavior of M2 and M3 might well persist for some
time. The value of these aggregates in guiding policy seemed to have
diminished in 1992 and 1993, and the Committee needed to continue to
rely on its evaluation of a broad array of other financial and
economic developments in its assessment of an appropriate course for
monetary policy. The members did not rule out the possibility that a
more normal or predictable relationship between money and economic
activity might be restored once the current process of balance sheet
adjustments was completed, the yield curve flattened, and some
stabilization in the intermediation function of depository
institutions emerged. In the view of a few members, moreover, the
lower range proposed for M2 might in fact be more consistent with the
rate of monetary growth that would be needed over the long term to
sustain price stability and satisfactory economic expansion, if the
earlier relationships between broad money growth and economic
performance were to reemerge.
Many of these members commented that the considerations
underlying the desirability of a technical adjustment to the ranges
for this year applied to 1994 as well, and they therefore supported
extending the reduced ranges to 1994 on a tentative basis subject to
review early next year. Monetary growth outcomes somewhat higher
within these ranges might be anticipated in association with the
somewhat faster economic growth and essentially unchanged rate of
inflation that most members had forecast for next year.
Several members indicated that while they could accept reductions in the 1993 ranges, they nonetheless preferred to retain the
existing ranges. One reason given for this preference was that the
prospective performance of the broad monetary aggregates in relation
to developments in the economy was not sufficiently understood to
warrant the specification of new ranges. Indeed, a change might be
misinterpreted as implying more knowledge about velocity relationships
than the Committee in fact possessed and could set up expectations
that the Committee would put greater and, depending on emerging
circumstances, perhaps undesirable emphasis on achieving monetary
growth within the new ranges. Moreover, to the extent that some
observers interpreted the ranges as the Committee's proxies for
presumed nominal GDP objectives, an erroneous conclusion could be
reached that the Committee had decided on a reduced target level of
nominal GDP even though the Committee had not in fact framed its
objectives in terms of GDP targets. On balance, while these members
did not view this choice as a matter of great consequence in current
circumstances, they concluded that it was marginally preferable to
retain the ranges for this year, and if necessary, to accept and
explain the reasons for a shortfall once the latter were more clearly
established. The members who preferred to retain the current ranges
agreed that there were plausible arguments on both sides of this issue
and they could accept a proposal to reduce the ranges for both 1993
and 1994.
In light of the limited reliance that the members felt they
could place on the behavior of the current monetary aggregates, the
Committee at this meeting reviewed the possible advantages of a newly
constructed measure of money. This measure involved the addition of
bond and stock mutual funds to M2 as currently defined. There were
indications that the shares of such funds had become closer substitutes for M2, and large portfolio shifts into such funds seemed to
account for much of the weakness in M2 and its uncertain relationship
to income and the longer-run behavior of prices. After examining the
properties of this measure and reviewing its past behavior in relation
to key indicators of economic performance, the members concluded that
it would not enhance the formulation or implementation of monetary
policy, at least at this point. However, the members agreed that
mutual funds flows should continue to be monitored for their effects
on M2 and that the relevant data should be made available to outside
analysts.
At the conclusion of its discussion, the Committee voted to
lower the M2 range that it had established in February by an additional one percentage point and to reduce the M3 range by another 1/2
percentage point, bringing the M2 range to 1 to 5 percent and that for
M3 to 0 to 4 percent for 1993. The Committee also voted to reduce the
annual monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
by 1/2 percentage point to 4 to 8 percent. The members anticipated
that this debt aggregate would continue to grow at a rate that was
roughly in line with that of nominal GDP. The Committee approved the
following statement for inclusion in its domestic policy directive.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting lowered the ranges it had established in
February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
Mullins, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, McTeer, Oltman, Ms. Phillips, and
Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: None.
Absent: Mr. Corrigan. (Mr. Oltman
voted as alternate for Mr. Corrigan.)
For the year 1994, the Committee approved provisional ranges
that were unchanged from the reduced levels for 1993. Accordingly,
the Committee voted to incorporate the following statement regarding
the 1994 ranges in its domestic policy directive.
For 1994, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges
for monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5
percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The
Committee provisionally set the monitoring range for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8
percent for 1994. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
Mullins. Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, McTeer, Oltman, Ms. Phillips. and
Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: None.
Absent: Mr. Corrigan. (Mr. Oltman
voted as alternate for Mr. Corrigan.)
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the period until
the next meeting, most of the members indicated that they saw little
or no reason to change monetary policy in either direction. The most
recent information on the performance of the economy was mixed, and
this together with questions about the course of fiscal policy
contributed to considerable uncertainty about the outlook. Even so,
the members felt that the evidence pointed on the whole to a sustained
rate of economic expansion. The latest price statistics provided some
encouragement that the apparent intensification of inflation in
earlier months of the year might have abated. For now, therefore,
nearly all the members saw the balance of factors bearing on the
course of economic activity and the outlook for inflation as calling
for an unchanged degree of pressure on reserve positions.
According to a staff analysis prepared for this meeting, the
growth of M2 could be expected to slow markedly in the months ahead
from its pace over the second quarter. The projected deceleration was
mainly associated with some unwinding of the second-quarter bulge in
mortgage refinancings along with further heavy inflows to bond and
stock mutual funds. The expansion of M3 appeared likely to be held
down by weaker bank credit extensions as alternative sources of funds
in the capital markets attracted more borrowers. On balance, modest
growth of both M2 and M3 would keep them close to the lower ends of
their downward-revised ranges through September.
Some members cautioned that despite the very sluggish
behavior of the broad measures of money thus far this year, monetary
policy was relatively expansive as evidenced by a variety of other
indicators including the growth in narrow measures of money and
reserves and the very low levels of money market interest rates.
Indeed, in the view of several members, in a period characterized by
indications of some worsening in inflationary expectations, a policy
course that maintained steady conditions in reserve markets could be
said to have become more accommodative as the federal funds rate, in
real terms after adjustment for expected inflation, moved down from an
already low level. Accordingly, while current monetary policy seemed
likely to support further economic-expansion, the Committee needed to
remain alert to the potential for intensifying inflation. At some
point the current policy stance could well begin to foster greater
price pressures. One member urged a prompt move toward restraint,
given the prospect in his view that further progress toward price
stability was unlikely with the current, quite stimulative, stance of
monetary policy.
A majority of the members, taking account of the current
stance of monetary policy, favored a proposal to retain the bias
toward possible tightening that the Committee had adopted at the May
meeting. In this connection, some commented that while the need for
any policy adjustment during the period ahead seemed somewhat remote,
the next policy move was more likely to be in the direction of some
firming than toward easing. Other members suggested that a symmetrical directive might be more consistent with current economic conditions and the related outlook for a steady policy course over the near
term. These members agreed, however, that a return to symmetry so
soon after the adoption of a directive that was biased toward
restraint could convey a misleading impression that recent developments had increased the Committee's concerns about the sustainability
of the expansion or that the Committee had become less committed to a
disinflationary policy course. Accordingly, these members indicated
that they could support an asymmetric directive at this point.
Several members observed that a number of key economic measures were
scheduled for release during the intermeeting period and that the data
in question should provide a firmer basis for evaluating the
performance of the economy and a desirable course for monetary policy.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
of the members indicated that they preferred or found acceptable a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that retained a bias toward possible firming
of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with modest growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the third quarter.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the economic expansion has picked up somewhat in
recent months from the very slow pace of the first
quarter. Total nonfarm payroll employment changed
little in June after registering substantial gains in
April and May, and the civilian unemployment rate edged
up to 7.0 percent in June. Industrial production has
changed little on balance over the last few months.
Real consumer expenditures edged higher in May after a
sizable rise in April but have increased only slightly
thus far this year. Housing starts turned up in April
from a depressed first-quarter pace and rose somewhat
further in May. Incoming data suggest a continued
brisk advance in outlays for business equipment, while
nonresidential construction has remained soft. The
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was about
unchanged in April but substantially larger than its
average rate in the first quarter. Consumer and
producer prices were about unchanged in May, but for
the year to date inflation has been more rapid than
in the second half of 1992.
Short-term interest rates have changed little
since the Committee meeting on May 18 while bond yields
have declined somewhat. In foreign exchange markets,
the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies increased on balance over the
intermeeting period.
After contracting during the first quarter, M2 and
M3 expanded appreciably over the second quarter. For
the year through June, growth of the two aggregates was
below the lower ends of the ranges established by the
Committee for 1993. Total domestic nonfinancial debt
expanded somewhat further through April.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting lowered the ranges it had established in
February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For 1994, the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in the broader monetary
aggregates over the third quarter.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
Mullins. Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey.
McTeer, Oltman, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Vote against this action: Mr. Angell.
Absent: Mr. Corrigan. (Mr. Oltman
voted as alternate for Mr. Corrigan.)
Mr. Angell dissented because he favored a prompt move to
tighten policy. In his view, monetary policy was overly expansive at
this point as evidenced by what he viewed as excessive liquidity in
financial markets, the negative level of real short-term interest
rates, and the disappointing lack of progress toward lower inflation
this year. Given indications of worsening inflationary expectations,
such as the substantial rise in the price of gold, as well as
projections of an increase in inflation, a policy that led to a steady
federal funds rate in fact implied a further easing of an already
stimulative monetary policy. In these circumstances, a tightening of
policy would not involve any significant risk to the expansion but
would foster changes in financial conditions and the outlook for
inflation that would be more consistent with renewed progress toward
price stability in 1994 and later. Declining inflation around the
world and a stronger trend of productivity growth in the United
States, among other factors, were providing a favorable environment
for further disinflation, but those developments needed to be
supported and validated by appropriate monetary policy action.
At this meeting, the Committee reviewed its practices with
regard to the release of information to the public. This review was
undertaken in response to media reports of the purported results of
the May meeting before the Committee had made public any information
about that meeting. In its discussion, the Committee reaffirmed its
long-standing rules governing the confidentiality of FOMC information,
including the schedule that calls for releasing the minutes of a
Committee meeting, along with an explanation of the Committee's
decisions, a few days after the next meeting. These rules are
designed to safeguard the Committee's flexibility to make needed
adjustments to policy and also to provide adequate time to prepare a
full report of the context and rationale for its decisions. Committee
members emphasized the potential for inadvertent leaks of information
in the course of general conversations with representatives of the
news media or others concerning the members' views about economic
developments or monetary policy. The members agreed that particular
care needed to be taken for some period before and after each of its
meetings.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, August 17, 1993.
The meeting adjourned at 12:25 p.m. on Wednesday, July 7,
1993.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007