FRB: FOMC Minutes--March 23, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of March 23, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,  on Tuesday, March 23,  1993,  at  9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr.  Greenspan, Chairman
Mr.  Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr.  Angell
Mr.  Boehne
Mr.  Keehn
Mr.  Kelley
Mr.  LaWare
Mr.  Lindsey
Mr.  McTeer
Mr.  Mullins
Ms.  Phillips
Mr.  Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and
Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Winn,1 Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Dewald, Goodfriend, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Kansas City,
St. Louis, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Ms. Browne, and Mr. Sniderman, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland, respectively
Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
1. Attended portion of meeting relating to discussion of merging
minutes of action and policy record into one document.
At the start of the meeting, the subcommittee established to
review policies relating to the release of Committee information
reported on its further deliberations and proposed a merging of the
current "Minutes of Actions" and the "Record of Policy Actions" into a
new document to be designated "Minutes of the Federal Open Market
Committee Meeting." Merging the two documents would put in convenient
form all the information that is released pertaining to FOMC meetings,
and the new document would be made public on the same schedule as its
predecessor documents. The Committee members endorsed the subcommittee's proposal and by unanimous vote the Committee approved the
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting" held on
February 2-3, 1993; this merged document was scheduled to be released
on March 26, 1993.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets since the previous meeting on
February 2-3, 1993. There were no System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during this intermeeting period, and thus no vote
was required of the Committee.
The Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations reported on
developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market
transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations
during the period February 3, 1993, through March 22, 1993. By
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the inter-meeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity was expanding at a more moderate pace in the early
months of 1993 after increasing substantially in the fourth quarter.
Although outlays for business equipment apparently remained on a
strong upward trajectory, sales of new homes had slackened and
consumer spending was rising less rapidly. Indicators of production
activity also were mixed: Industrial output had continued to post
solid gains, but homebuilding had been less robust since year-end.
Payroll employment had strengthened, and the unemployment rate had
moved down further. Increases in wages had remained subdued in recent
months, but advances in consumer and producer prices had been larger
than those recorded in the latter part of 1992.
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in February,
following generally small advances in previous months, and the length
of the average workweek remained at the fourth-quarter level. The
strong job gains in construction, services, and retail trade in
February apparently reflected to some extent a partial reversal of the
special factors that had depressed reported employment in these
sectors in previous months. Since December, initial claims for
unemployment insurance had fluctuated in a range that was consistent
with further modest growth in employment. The civilian unemployment
rate edged lower again in February, to 7.0 percent.
Industrial production continued to rise at a fairly brisk
pace in January and February. Changes in mining and utilities were
about offsetting on balance over the two months, but increases in
manufacturing were fairly widespread. Although motor vehicle assemblies fell in February from a relatively high January level, the
production of consumer durables and computers turned up sharply.
In addition, increases in output were recorded in several other
categories, including non-energy materials and construction supplies.
Recent surveys indicated that new orders for durable goods increased
further in February, and lean factory inventories coupled with reports
of lengthening delivery times suggested further gains in industrial
output in coming months. Total utilization of industrial capacity
rose again in February.
Retail sales advanced in February after a fourth-quarter
surge and a pause in January. Sales at automotive dealers weakened in
February. However, there were sharp increases in sales of building
materials and supplies, miscellaneous durable goods, and nondurable
goods other than apparel. After registering sizable gains late last
year, housing starts fell substantially in January and retraced only
part of that decline in February. The slowdown was concentrated in
single-family housing starts; multifamily starts were up in February
from a historically low level in January. Although mortgage interest
rates had dropped to the lowest levels in decades, sales of both new
and existing homes turned down in January from their high December
levels.
Incoming data on orders and shipments of nondefense capital
goods suggested a further brisk advance in outlays for business
equipment in coming months. In January, a decline in shipments of
nondefense capital goods only partially reversed a large December
rise, as a surge in shipments of computing equipment helped sustain
the overall level. Shipments of complete civilian aircraft posted a
solid gain in January. The increase appeared to be concentrated in
sales to foreign purchasers; in the domestic airline industry, intense
competition was forcing cutbacks of unprofitable routes and reductions
in both the number of planes in service and orders for new planes.
Shipments of durable equipment other than computers and aircraft fell
in January to about the level of the fourth quarter. On the other
hand, the January reading on new orders for these goods was well above
the average for the fourth quarter, suggesting that additional
advances in shipments might lie ahead. Nonresidential construction
activity was down slightly further in January, reflecting persisting
declines in office and industrial building in an environment of excess
supply and some continuing, though perhaps lessening, downward
pressure on the prices of such structures.
Business inventories appeared to have edged lower in January.
In manufacturing, factory stocks were drawn down further, and most
industries had relatively low stocks-to-shipments ratios. Among
wholesalers, strong January sales pulled down inventories at many
types of establishments; in numerous cases, a large accumulation of
stocks in the fourth quarter was reversed. For the wholesale sector
as a whole, the inventories-to-sales ratio in January was near the
bottom of the range of the past two years. Retail inventories rose
somewhat further in January after a large December increase. Stocks
at automotive dealers accounted for all of the January accumulation.
At retail stores other than auto dealers, the ratio of inventories-to-sales remained within the narrow range observed over the past year.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit widened slightly
in January but was little changed from its average level in the fourth
quarter. The value of both exports and imports dropped sharply in
January from the December levels. The decline in imports was spread
widely among major trade categories, but the decrease in exports
largely reflected a reduction in shipments of aircraft after a strong
December rise. Among the major foreign industrialized countries, the
level of real activity contracted further in the fourth quarter in
Japan, western Germany, and France; for the first quarter, the limited
data available were generally weak for Japan and France but somewhat
more mixed for western Germany. By contrast, economic activity
appeared to be increasing in Canada and the United Kingdom.
Producer prices of finished goods were up in January and
February after changing little over the fourth quarter. Producer
prices of finished foods declined over the first two months of the
year, but prices of finished energy products climbed rapidly, and
prices of other finished items rose at a faster rate than in 1992. At
the consumer level, price increases in January and February also were
on the high side of the past year's advances. Food prices jumped in
January and rose slightly further in February, while energy prices
retraced most of a sharp January rise. Excluding food and energy
items, consumer prices advanced at a substantially faster pace over
the January-February period than in 1992. Increases in wages, as
measured by average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory
workers, remained subdued in recent months. The advance in average
hourly earnings slowed in February, and the rise over the twelve
months ended in February was considerably smaller than over the
previous twelve-month period.
At its meeting on February 2-3, 1993, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
associated with this directive were expected to be consistent with
little change in the levels of M2 and M3 over the two-month period
from January through March.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged only slightly
above expected levels in the three full reserve maintenance periods in
the intermeeting interval. For the period as a whole, the federal
funds rate remained close to the 3 percent level that had prevailed in
previous months.
Other short-term interest rates changed little over the
intermeeting period, while long-term rates fell appreciably on
balance. Bond markets rallied over most of the period, reflecting
market assessments of improved prospects for significant reductions in
the federal budget deficit in coming years and the consequences for
overall spending. Prices of Treasury notes and bonds also were
boosted by municipal defeasance activity and by perceptions of
heightened prepayment risks in mortgage-backed securities. In early
March, interest rates on long-term Treasury bonds and conventional
fixed-rate mortgages reached their lowest levels since 1973, but some
of the decline in bond and mortgage rates subsequently was reversed in
response to increased apprehension about inflation. Equity prices
generally responded favorably to the drop in long-term interest rates,
but concerns about future changes in government policy toward a number
of industries, including health care, led to lower prices in some
segments of the equities market.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies fell on balance over the
intermeeting period. The dollar depreciated through late February,
partly in response to declines in U.S. long-term interest rates and
incoming data that were seen as pointing to some slowing of the
expansion in the United States. Subsequently, the dollar rebounded in
the wake of unexpectedly strong U.S. employment statistics, disappointing inflation numbers, and further signs of weakening economic
activity abroad. Near the end of the period, the dollar again dropped
against the German mark and other European currencies, following a cut
by the Bundesbank of its discount rate that apparently was less than
market participants were expecting. On balance over the period, the
dollar was marginally lower against the mark and other European
currencies, but it declined substantially against the Japanese yen,
reaching an all-time low.
M2 and M3 contracted in January and February. Part of the
weakness apparently reflected temporary factors, such as distortions
in seasonal adjustment factors and a lull in prepayments of mortgage-backed securities that reduced deposits held in association with this
activity. More fundamentally, relatively attractive returns on
capital market instruments continued to prompt households to shift
large amounts of liquid balances into market investments, such as bond
and stock mutual fund shares. In addition, banks continued to issue
subordinated debt and equity to improve their balance sheets at a
time when the expansion of bank credit was slowing noticeably; in
particular, bank lending to businesses had been depressed by paydowns
from the proceeds of heavy bond and stock issuance by nonfinancial
corporations. Total domestic nonfinancial debt appeared to have
expanded somewhat further in January.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic activity would grow over the year ahead at a pace that would
foster a further gradual reduction in margins of unemployed labor and
capital. The projection incorporated the essential elements of the
fiscal proposals recently set forth by the Administration; the effects
on aggregate demand, all other things equal, were expected to be small
over the next several quarters. However, the appreciable declines in
long-term interest rates that had occurred in recent months--evidently
partly in response to anticipations of intermediate-term deficit
reduction--were expected to support substantial additional gains in
business and residential investment. Consumer spending would be
bolstered by the progress already achieved in reducing debt service
burdens and by a gradual lessening of concerns regarding job security,
although the higher personal income taxes now envisioned for upper-income taxpayers were expected to be an inhibiting factor. Increases
in export demand would be limited in the near term by the continuing
weakness in the economies of the major industrialized countries. The
persisting slack in resource utilization was expected to be associated
with a return to more subdued price increases after a spurt earlier
this year.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, the members remained encouraged by recent
developments that they viewed on the whole as tending to confirm their
forecasts of sustained economic expansion, though at a pace appreciably below that now indicated for the fourth quarter of 1992. If
realized, such economic growth would be associated over time with a
further gradual decline in unemployment. While the expansion appeared
to have generated some momentum, a number of factors were likely to
limit its strength, including ongoing balance sheet and business
restructuring activities, the outlook for a more restrictive federal
budget, and continuing weakness in key foreign markets. At the same
time, greatly reduced interest rates and much improved, if still
vulnerable, business and consumer confidence were positive factors in
the outlook. Some members cautioned that even though a moderate rate
of economic growth could be viewed as the most likely outcome over the
forecast horizon, the current expansion differed in important respects
from earlier cyclical recoveries and in light of the attendant
uncertainties a considerably different result--in either direction--could not be ruled out. With regard to the outlook for inflation, the
faster increases in consumer prices in recent months and a sharp
upturn in the prices of certain producer materials tended to raise
concerns, or at least a degree of unease, with regard to underlying
inflation trends. While these developments might well prove to be an
aberration rather than a signal of intensifying inflation, they did
suggest the need to reassess the likelihood of a further decline in
inflation and to be alert to further signs of a sustained upturn. For
now, however, the favorable trends in underlying unit labor costs,
which were associated in turn with ongoing gains in productivity and
the absence of any firming in wage pressures, led many members to
conclude that recent price developments did not provide persuasive
evidence of a change in the inflation outlook.
Members continued to report somewhat uneven business conditions across the nation. Steady economic growth characterized many
parts of the country, but business activity remained depressed in some
areas and industries, notably those related to defense, aerospace, and
nonresidential construction. While business sentiment was generally
positive, many business contacts were uncertain about the outlook for
demand in their own industries or the potential strength of the
overall expansion, and recent fiscal policy developments appeared to
have introduced a further note of caution. This uncertainty helped to
account for the continuing reliance of numerous firms on overtime work
to meet growing demand rather than incurring the considerable costs of
adding new workers. Even so, an increasing number of contacts were
reporting worker recalls or new hires. One member commented that job
growth could be viewed both as a measure of business sentiment and as
a necessary element in building or maintaining consumer confidence and
thus helping to ensure an enduring economic expansion.
The quickening recovery during 1992, especially in the second
half of the year, had received considerable impetus from consumer
spending, and while growth in such spending could be expected to
moderate from its pace in recent quarters, the consumer sector was
viewed as likely to play a key role in sustaining the expansion this
year. Many consumers had taken advantage of steep declines in
interest rates to strengthen their balance sheets and reduce their
debt service burdens, and they were now in a much improved position to
finance further growth in their expenditures. The members took note
of recent indications of a decline in consumer confidence and of some
softening in retail sales since early in the year. However, the
latter appeared to be in part the result of recently adverse weather
conditions in some major parts of the country, and consumer confidence
was still much improved on balance since earlier in the recovery.
Accordingly, recent developments were not seen in themselves as
harbingers of a weakening consumer spending trend over the next
several quarters.
Business spending on producers' durable equipment also was
believed likely to continue to provide appreciable stimulus to the
expansion assuming that the much reduced interest rates and currently
favorable business attitudes would be sustained and that proposed
investment tax credit legislation eventually would be enacted. At the
same time, business spending for nonresidential structures probably
would continue to be held back by weakness in office construction
stemming from widespread overcapacity. While office building activity
was likely to be restrained for an extended period, members saw some
positive signs that pointed to a degree of stabilization in this
sector, including the leveling out or even a marginal pickup in rents
and occupancy rates in some markets that previously had been severely
depressed. A slow turnaround in other building activity was reported
in some regions, notably for industrial and retail structures.
While the available data on starts of single-family houses
in January and February were somewhat disappointing, the members felt
that housing construction activity had held up relatively well thus
far this year, after allowing for the adverse weather conditions that
had retarded construction in some areas. The greatly reduced cost of
mortgage financing pointed to continuing gains in housing construction
despite a rise in costs associated with the sharp jump in lumber
prices and a scarcity of finished building lots in some areas.
The members agreed that the prospects for overall spending on
business capital goods and housing were vulnerable to shifts in
attitudes that might be triggered, for example, by increases in market
interest rates associated with an absence of progress in reducing the
federal budget deficit. The outlook for a significant contraction in
the federal deficit was subject to considerable uncertainty,
especially in light of the still pending decisions to be made with
regard to health care programs and their financing. The members
recognized that the direct effects of appreciable deficit reduction
would tend to constrain economic activity, as evidenced by the impact
in many areas of the defense cutbacks that were already being
implemented. Business contacts had expressed concerns about the
potential effects on their industries and local markets of various
provisions in the proposed legislation. Even so, a more encompassing
assessment of the effects of deficit reduction needed to take account
of its favorable implications for domestic interest rates. Moreover,
insofar as the nearer-term outlook was concerned, the fiscal
legislation now under consideration included new spending initiatives
and the investment tax credit that were intended to provide some
temporary stimulus to an economic expansion that, in the view of many
observers, might still be in the process of gathering sustainable
momentum. On balance, substantial deficit reduction in line with the
currently proposed legislation was seen as likely to have a positive
effect on business and consumer confidence, financial markets, and the
longer-term health of the economy.
Several members observed that the outlook for exports had
worsened as a result of weakening economic trends in a number of major
industrialized nations. Members also commented on the uncertainties
in the outlook for foreign trade associated with a variety of
political risks abroad and the persisting protectionism that currently
was highlighted by strong opposition to key trade agreements now under
negotiation or under consideration for ratification. Anecdotal
information from business contacts involved in export markets
continued to suggest lagging foreign demands for many U.S. goods;
however, backlogs for other products, such as labor-saving capital
equipment, remained sizable.
The members devoted considerable attention to the discussion
of various factors underlying the outlook for inflation. The consumer
and producer price indexes had been less favorable in January and
February than in the latter part of 1992. Also, prices of various
industrial and construction materials had firmed since the start of
the year in apparent response to rising production and, in some
industries, to import or environmental restrictions. Anecdotal
reports of increasing costs and prices had begun to appear with
somewhat greater frequency in some areas, and pressures to widen
profit margins reportedly were strong in a number of industries. In
their evaluation of recent inflation developments, however, the
members generally gave more weight to the behavior of unit labor
costs, which indicated that much of the economy's underlying cost
structure did not reflect any signs of a pickup in inflationary
pressures. Moreover, from a financial perspective, extensions of
credit and growth in overall nonfinancial sector debt were not
consistent with an economy that was generating significant inflationary pressures, and the recent behavior of long-term debt markets
suggested expectations of more subdued inflation. Against this background, the recent upturn in consumer and certain commodity prices
might well represent a temporary development such as had occurred
previously during the current cyclical upswing. In support of this
view, members cited various fundamentals that seemed inconsistent with
accelerating inflation, including the considerable slack in the utilization of labor and capital resources, strong competitive conditions
in many markets, the absence of significant lengthening in supplier
delivery schedules, and an extended period of weak expansion in the
broader monetary aggregates that now encompassed some recent deceleration in M1. Nonetheless, the members acknowledged that recent
price developments had raised a degree of unease in their minds, and
their concerns would rise if the recent pace of price advances were
sustained in the months immediately ahead. One member observed that a
somewhat faster economic expansion than currently was expected by most
members might well serve to intensify inflation pressures. While
price developments were notably difficult to predict, most of the
members concluded that the evidence at this point did not confirm a
resurgence in inflationary pressures, and some commented that further
modest disinflation remained a reasonable expectation for the next
several quarters.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, most of the members endorsed a proposal to maintain an
unchanged degree of pressure on reserve positions, while two members
supported an immediate move to tighten reserve conditions. In the
majority view, the current degree, of reserve pressure continued to
represent a policy stance that was appropriately balanced in light of
the opposing risks of a faltering economic expansion and a resurgence
of inflation. Conditions in credit markets did not provide confirming
evidence of the emergence of greater inflationary pressures and the
need to restrain the growth in credit. Indeed, the continuation of
balance sheet restructuring activities by financial institutions and
the associated caution on the part of these institutions with regard
to extending loans still appeared to be exerting a significantly
inhibiting effect on the overall growth in spending and economic
activity. Several members acknowledged that a policy of maintaining
unchanged reserve conditions and an associated federal funds rate
around current levels, which implied that real short-term rates were
near zero or even slightly negative, could have inflationary
consequences in the event of a strengthening of the expansion and a
sustained pickup in credit demands. The Committee would need to
remain alert to such a development. In present circumstances,
however, an unchanged policy stance seemed most consistent with
achieving sustained economic expansion in an environment of subdued
inflation. The members who favored a prompt move toward restraint
were persuaded that a steady policy incurred an unacceptable risk of
halting the progress toward price stability and indeed of intensifying
inflation as the current expansion matured. In this view, a policy
tightening move at this point was likely to counter the need for more
substantial and potentially disruptive tightening actions later.
In the course of the Committee discussion, the members took
account of a staff analysis that pointed to a resumption of M2 and M3
growth over the months ahead. This analysis suggested that the temporary factors depressing the broader monetary aggregates likely would
be reversing, but that the other influences causing a rechanneling of
credit flows away from depository institutions and boosting the
velocity of money undoubtedly would persist, though probably with
diminishing force. Accordingly, the staff foresaw moderate growth of
M2 and M3 that at midyear would leave these aggregates below the lower
ends of the Committee's ranges for 1993. Under prevailing circumstances, such continuing weakness in the broader aggregates was not
viewed as indicating inadequate monetary stimulus. Indeed, a number
of members commented that other indicators suggested that current
monetary policy was in fact quite accommodative as evidenced for
example by low short-term interest rates, especially on an inflation-adjusted basis. Moreover, Ml, reserves, and the monetary base had
continued to expand in the first quarter, though at much reduced
rates. One member commented that the slowdown in these narrower
monetary measures, which he viewed as important indicators of the
thrust of monetary policy, had favorable implications with regard to
bringing inflation under control. The members agreed that the
considerable uncertainty that continued to surround the outlook for
broad money relative to spending implied that forming precise expectations for monetary growth over the months ahead was not feasible.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting
adjustments to the degree of reserve pressure, members who favored an
unchanged policy stance also expressed a preference for retaining the
symmetry of the existing directive. Some observed that a policy
change during the intermeeting period, if any, might well be in the
direction of a tightening move. However, because there was no
compelling case in the view of most members for such a move at this
time and any intermeeting adjustment would be made in the light of
emerging developments, a symmetric directive was warranted. In this
connection, one member commented that, given the Committee's assessment of current economic and financial conditions, a tilt in the
directive toward restraint would give a misleading indication of the
Committee's current intentions. Members also noted that a change in
policy, should one be called for by intermeeting developments, would
represent a shift in the direction of policy and would be likely to
have an especially pronounced impact on financial markets.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, a majority
of the members indicated that they favored a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
These members also expressed a preference for a directive that did not
include a presumption about the likely direction of any adjustment to
policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with a
resumption of moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the second quarter.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity has increased at a more moderate
pace in the early months of 1993 after expanding
robustly in the fourth quarter. Total nonfarm payroll
employment registered a sharp increase in February
following generally small advances in previous months,
and the civilian unemployment rate edged down further
to 7.0 percent. Industrial production continued to
post solid gains in January and February. Retail sales
increased somewhat further over the first two months of
the year after a fourth-quarter surge. Housing starts
slipped in early 1993 after registering sizable gains
late last year. Incoming data on orders and shipments
of nondefense capital goods suggest a further brisk
advance in outlays for business equipment, while nonresidential construction has remained soft. The
nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was essentially
unchanged in January from its average level in the
fourth quarter, but both exports and imports were substantially lower. Increases in wages have remained
subdued, but recent advances in consumer and producer
prices have been larger than those recorded in the
latter part of 1992.
Short-term interest rates have changed little
since the Committee meeting in early February while
bond yields have fallen appreciably on balance. In
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of
the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies
declined on balance over the intermeeting period.
M2 and M3 contracted in January and February,
apparently reflecting transitory factors and further
shifts into market investments. Total domestic nonfinancial debt appears to have expanded somewhat
further in January.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in February established ranges for growth of M2
and M3 of 2 to 6 percent and 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1992
to the fourth quarter of 1993. The Committee expects
that developments contributing to unusual velocity
increases are likely to persist during the year. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for
the year. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with a resumption of moderate growth in the broader
monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
Corrigan, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, McTeer,
Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Angell
and Lindsey.
Messrs. Angell and Lindsey indicated that their concerns about
the outlook for inflation prompted them to favor an immediate move to
tighten reserve conditions. In their view, such an action was desirable
not only to arrest the possible emergence of greater inflation but
especially to promote further disinflation. They were persuaded that
monetary policy currently was overly accommodative as suggested by
various indicators such as recent data on consumer and producer prices,
the upswing in commodity prices, the low level of real short-term
interest rates, and what in their judgment was a relatively depressed
foreign exchange value of the dollar given the comparative strength of
the U.S. economy and international interest rate trends. They noted
that the current federal funds rate was probably not sustainable in the
long term and that a tightening move at this time might well avoid the
need for more sizable and potentially disruptive policy actions later.
Mr. Angell also emphasized the risks associated with any policy
that did not firmly maintain a disinflationary trend. As he interpreted
historical precedents, the typical result of a policy that tolerated
some inflation was an eventual rise in inflation leading to permanently
higher interest rates with adverse effects on economic activity.
Indeed, he supported unpegging the federal funds rate to counter
incipient price pressures showing through in commodity and finished
goods prices. He believed that a clear signal of the Committee's
commitment to price level stability would stabilize the price of gold
along with the exchange value of the dollar and thereby provide a
climate for further reductions in long-and intermediate-term interest
rates. Such an approach to policy not only would assure a continuing
disinflationary trend and eventual price stability, with very favorable
implications for financial markets and economic growth, but it would in
his view preclude an unsettling tendency for the debt markets to weaken
every time newly available data appeared to suggest that economic growth
was strengthening and that further monetary policy tightening actions
therefore might be in the offing. In sum, such a policy would provide
for the achievement of the Committee's objective of sustaining progress
toward price stability which he believed was necessary for maintaining
recent higher labor productivity, a permanently higher savings rate, and
a prolonged period of economic expansion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, May 18, 1993.
The meeting adjourned.
Normand Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007