FRB: FOMC Minutes--August 17, 1993
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of August 17, 1993
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 17, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Promisel, Rosenblum, Scheld,
Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, Associate
Economists
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director. Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs. Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton. Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance. Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, T. Davis, Dewald,
Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Cleveland, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents.
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
By unanimous vote, the minutes for the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on July 6-7, 1993, were approved.
Secretary's Note: Advice had been received of the election
of William J. McDonough by the Board of Directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York as a member of the Federal
Open Market Committee for the period commencing July 19,
1993, and ending December 31, 1993, and that he had executed
his oath of office.
By unanimous vote, the Committee elected William J. McDonough
as Vice Chairman of the Committee to serve until the first meeting of
the Committee after December 31, 1993.
The Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments in foreign exchange markets during the period since the July meeting. There were no System open market transactions in foreign currencies during this period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 7, 1993, through August 16, 1993. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
and financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial information available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed by the Committee suggested that
economic activity was expanding at a moderate pace. The limited data
available for the third quarter presented a mixed picture but on
balance pointed to continued expansion in consumption, business fixed
investment, and homebuilding. Employment remained on an uptrend, and
industrial production recently had firmed somewhat. After rising at a
faster rate in the early part of the year, consumer prices had changed
little and producer prices had fallen in recent months.
Total nonfarm payroll employment, after a small gain in June,
expanded in July at a rate close to its average advance in earlier
months of the year. The services industries, led by business
services, provided half of the July increase. Elsewhere, considerable
hiring was evident in wholesale and retail trade, and construction
employment moved up after a small decline in June. In manufacturing,
more jobs were lost, although at a slower rate than earlier in the
year. The civilian unemployment rate dropped to 6.8 percent in July.
Industrial production recovered in July from small declines
in May and June. Manufacturing output rose in spite of a sizable
cutback in motor vehicle assemblies: utility production registered a
strong weather-related gain; and mining output declined further. Within manufacturing, the production of consumer durable goods other
than automobiles and trucks rebounded in July, and the output of
business equipment advanced further. Total utilization of industrial
capacity edged higher in July, reflecting a substantial gain at
electric utilities: utilization of manufacturing capacity was
unchanged.
Retail sales increased slightly further in July after a
sizable rise in the second quarter. Spending on automobiles was down
for a second straight month, but sales were strong at apparel,
furniture and appliance, and general merchandise stores. Total
housing starts, depressed by wet weather and floods in some areas of
the country, were down somewhat in July; however, permit issuance
moved up, suggesting that homebuilding activity remained in a mild
uptrend. In addition, consumer surveys indicated that attitudes
toward homebuying continued to be strongly positive during July, and
builders' assessments of home sales improved substantially.
Business fixed investment increased in the second quarter at
about the rapid pace of the first quarter. Business spending for
equipment remained strong, with solid increases in business purchases
of motor vehicles, computers, and a wide range of machinery and
equipment. However, outlays for aircraft declined in the second
quarter, retracing some of the substantial first-quarter rise. The
limited information available for the third quarter pointed to some
slowing of the growth of business spending for equipment. In the
second quarter, nonresidential building activity posted its largest
advance in three years. Expenditures were up across a broad array of
categories, with investment in institutional and public utilities
structures being particularly strong.
Business inventories expanded moderately during the second
quarter, and inventory accumulation was broadly in line with sales
over the first half of the year. In manufacturing, stocks edged lower
in June, reflecting a further decline in inventories held by aircraft
producers. Outside of the aircraft industry, inventory changes were
mixed. For manufacturing as a whole, the ratio of inventories to
shipments fell in June to one of the lowest levels in recent years.
In the wholesale trade sector, inventories expanded modestly in June,
and with sales lower, the inventory-to-sales ratio for the sector
increased slightly. Retail inventories, after changing little in May,
rose slightly more than sales in June, and the stocks-to-sales ratio
for the retail sector remained near the high end of its range for the
past several years.
The nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit was considerably
smaller in May than the deficits recorded in March and April: however,
the deficit for April and May combined was larger than the average
rate for the first quarter. The value of exports rose slightly in
May; increases in sales abroad of industrial supplies, machinery, and
consumer goods offset declines in agricultural products, civilian
aircraft, and motor vehicles and parts. A drop in the value of
imports was spread across a wide range of products, particularly
automotive products, consumer goods, and oil. The economic performance of the major foreign industrial countries was mixed in the second
quarter. Output continued to decline in western Germany, and economic
activity in Japan appeared to have stalled after modest growth in the
first quarter. In contrast, economic recovery continued in Canada and
the United Kingdom.
Producer prices of finished goods declined in July for a
second consecutive month. Prices of finished foods edged lower, and prices of finished energy goods, particularly gasoline and fuel oil
fell significantly; excluding the food and energy components, producer
prices edged up in July and to that point in the year had risen at a
slightly lower rate than was recorded in 1992. At the consumer level,
prices for nonfood, non-energy items were up slightly in both June and
July and for the year to date had increased a little more slowly than
last year. Hourly compensation for private industry workers rose in
the second quarter at about the rate seen last year. Average hourly
earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers were unchanged on
balance over June and July, but for the year through July these
earnings had increased at the same pace as in 1992.
At its meeting on July 6-7, 1993, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that retained a tilt toward possible firming
of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly,
the directive indicated that in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,
and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable
or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth of the
broader monetary aggregates over the third quarter.
Throughout the intermeeting period, open market operations
were directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Two upward revisions were made to expected levels
of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing in anticipation of further
increases in demand for seasonal credit. Borrowing averaged close to expected levels over most of the intermeeting interval, and the federal funds rate remained close to 3 percent.
Money market interest rates were little changed on balance
over the intermeeting period, while rates on intermediate-term U.S.
Treasury obligations and on fixed-rate mortgages dropped slightly.
Yields on long-term Treasury and corporate bonds were down by more,
with the rate on the 30-year Treasury bond falling below 6-1/2
percent. Many market interest rates moved higher after Chairman
Greenspan's congressional testimony on July 20, which was perceived by
market participants as suggesting a greater likelihood of some
tightening of monetary policy in the future. Subsequently, interest
rates generally retreated in reaction to incoming economic data
indicating subdued inflation pressures and to the passage of the
deficit-reduction legislation. Major indexes of stock prices
increased somewhat over the intermeeting period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies was about unchanged on
balance over the intermeeting period. The dollar strengthened
slightly against the German mark, but it rose by significantly more
against most other European currencies in the Exchange Rate Mechanism
in the aftermath of a widening of the margins within which participating currencies are allowed to fluctuate relative to each other.
The widening, which was in response to massive selling pressures on
the French franc and several other currencies, followed sharp
increases in short-term interest rates in the affected countries.
With exchange market participants continuing to focus on Japan's trade
surplus, the dollar fell substantially against the yen.
M2 expanded only slightly in July after growing appreciably over the second quarter. The continued strength of inflows to bond and stock mutual funds suggested that households were still realigning
their portfolios toward assets outside the monetary aggregates.
Through July, M2 was estimated to have grown at a rate close to the
lower end of the Committee's range for the year. M3 contracted
slightly in June and July, owing in part to a substantial drop in
institution-only money market mutual funds, whose returns had not kept
pace with the increase in money market rates in late spring. In
addition, depository institutions placed greater reliance on various
nondeposit sources of funds, including the issuance of equity and
subordinated debt. Through July, M3 had declined a little and was
slightly below its annual range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt had
expanded at a moderate rate in recent months, and for the year through
June was estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half of
the Committee's monitoring range.
The staff projection prepared for this meeting suggested
moderate growth in economic activity and modest reductions in margins
of unemployed labor and capital through next year. The fiscal
restraint stemming from the recent legislation and uncertainty about
other government policies would act as a drag on the economy. On the
other hand, lower interest rates were expected to contribute to
further gains in spending on consumer durables, housing, and business
fixed investment. Continued expansion also would be supported by
further improvements in the availability of credit, a small boost to
production over the next several quarters associated with rebuilding
activity in areas of the Midwest affected by the recent floods, and a
pickup in foreign demand resulting from some strengthening in economic
activity abroad. The projected slack in labor and product markets,
coupled with some tempering of inflation expectations, was expected to
foster modest further reductions in wage and price inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of prospective economic conditions, members commented that recent developments had not materially
altered the outlook for moderate and sustained growth in economic
activity. Despite widespread indications of pessimistic consumer and
business attitudes, overall consumer spending and business investment
appeared to be reasonably well maintained. Likewise, the outlook for
increased fiscal restraint associated with the recently enacted
deficit-reduction legislation needed to be weighed against the favorable effects on spending of reduced interest rates in intermediate-
and long-term debt markets, the improved balance sheets of consumers
and businesses, and the indications of a somewhat better availability
of loans from financial intermediaries. In an environment of moderate
economic growth, the fundamentals bearing on the outlook for inflation
were consistent with further disinflation, and the members drew some
encouragement from consumer and producer price developments in recent
months. Several cautioned, however, that recent price measures
probably overstated the reduction in inflation, just as the surge in
prices earlier in the year seemed to have overstated the underlying
inflation trend. Members also referred to the persistence of
inflationary expectations among business executives and consumers.
Thus, while the rise in inflation appeared to have been arrested, any
further progress toward price stability was likely to be limited over
the quarters ahead.
Business contacts and other sources of information suggested
little change since the July meeting in the pace or composition of
economic activity in different parts of the country. Descriptions of
economic performance varied from slow to moderate growth in most
regions, though business activity probably continued to weaken
in some major areas such as California. Despite sustained, if not ebullient, growth in sales to consumers and the relative strength in
business investment spending in the first half of this year, business
sentiment was widely described as cautious or negative even in some regions whose economies were outperforming the nation as a whole.
According to business contacts, the recent enactment of deficit-reduction legislation had tended to mitigate concerns about the size
of future federal deficits, but business executives were now focusing
on the implications of higher taxes and many were expressing
apprehension about further though still unannounced tax increases that
might be associated with health care reform. Business sentiment and
sales also were being affected adversely in many areas by cutbacks in
defense contracts and closings of military installations and by the
weakness in foreign demand for some products.
With regard to developments and prospects in key sectors of
the economy, members noted that despite further survey indications of
eroding consumer confidence, consumer expenditures had strengthened in
recent months after a pause earlier in the year. The pickup had
featured rising sales of motor vehicles, and while the latter had
slipped recently, a number of special factors such as shortages of
popular models at the end of the model year and the effects of
flooding in some parts of the Midwest suggested the need to withhold
judgment on any downward shift in the underlying demand for motor
vehicles. Tourism was reported to have strengthened considerably in
many areas this summer, though there were major exceptions. As had
been true for an extended period, consumer attitudes continued to be
inhibited by concerns about employment opportunities, especially given
further reductions in defense spending, the ongoing restructuring and
related downsizing of many business operations, and the continuing
efforts by business firms to limit the number of their permanent employees in order to hold down the rising costs of health care and
other nonwage worker benefits. Members noted, however, that the
growth in employment thus far this year, while tending to involve many
low paying jobs, had greatly exceeded the rate of expansion in 1992.
In the view of at least some members, appreciable further growth was
likely as business firms found it increasingly difficult in an
expanding economy to meet growing demands through outsourcing,
temporary workers, and overtime work. Some members also noted that
the newly legislated taxes on higher incomes would tend to curtail
some consumer spending. The timing of that effect was uncertain; tax
liabilities had already risen, but some payments on the added tax
liabilities were not due until April of 1994 and 1995.
Members anticipated that building activity, notably housing
construction, would provide some stimulus to the expansion. Although
indicators of housing activity were somewhat mixed for the nation as a
whole, sales of new and existing homes were brisk in many regions
and even sales of second homes were reported to be improving in some
areas. Prospective homebuyers continued to exercise considerable
caution, but reductions in mortgage rates and generally improved
affordability pointed to rising housing sales and construction over
the quarters ahead. In the nonresidential sector, there was growing
evidence of some strengthening in the construction of commercial and
institutional structures, but overcapacity was likely to depress the
construction of new office buildings for an extended period in most
parts of the country. In some areas, infrastructure and other
rebuilding associated with the recent floods was likely to stimulate
some construction activity later this year.
With regard to the external sector of the economy, the
members again noted a somewhat mixed picture. Exporters from some parts of the country continued to report relatively brisk sales
abroad, but many domestic producers were expressing concerns about
weak markets in key foreign nations. Against the background of more
stimulative economic policies in a number of those countries, some
overall strengthening in the major foreign economies was viewed as a
reasonable expectation, but the overall growth in exports was likely
to lag the anticipated expansion in imports over the projection
horizon. The North American Free Trade Agreement now under consideration in the Congress was a topic of active discussion among business
contacts, and the uncertain outcome of that treaty was a matter of
concern in several parts of the country.
Members observed that the more favorable performance of key
measures of prices in recent months had tended to relieve earlier
concerns about a possible worsening of inflation. However, because
the recent price indexes probably overstated the improvement in the
trend rate of inflation, it was too early to determine whether they
pointed to renewed disinflation. In any event, a number of
fundamental factors appeared to have favorable implications for the
inflation outlook, notably the prospect that some slack in labor and
capital resources would persist in the context of projections that
pointed to a relatively moderate rate of economic expansion. Members
continued to cite reports from numerous business firms regarding their
inability to raise prices because of the highly competitive markets in
which those firms had to operate. Many business contacts also
referred to the absence of significant increases--and indeed to
occasional decreases--in the costs of their outside purchases. Oil
price developments in world markets and the ongoing competition from
foreign producers also were noted as favorable elements in the outlook
for inflation. On the negative side, adverse weather conditions in recent months including severe floods in the Midwest appeared to have
fostered some upward pressure on food prices, and higher taxes would
raise gasoline prices in the fourth quarter. Perhaps of greater
significance, business contacts and surveys of households indicated
persisting expectations that inflation would rise at some point. In
this connection, however, passage of the federal deficit-reduction
legislation and the Committee's reaffirmation in its directive and in
congressional testimony of its commitment to price stability seemed to
have had a constructive effect on attitudes in financial markets and
on long-term interest rates, and these developments could prove to be harbingers of more favorable inflation attitudes more generally.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, the members agreed that recent developments pointed to
the desirability of a steady policy course. While economic growth did
not seem particularly robust, neither was it clear that a disinflationary trend had been reestablished. Many members observed that real
short-term interest rates were at very low levels, indeed slightly
negative by some calculations, and while real intermediate- and long-term interest rates were higher, it was apparent that monetary policy
was in an accommodative posture. This conclusion was seen as
reinforcing the view that monetary policy probably would have to move
in the direction of restraint at some point to resist any incipient
tendency for inflationary pressures to intensify. For now, the
relatively slow economic expansion in the first half of the year, the
fiscal restraint associated with the deficit-reduction legislation,
other obstacles to economic growth, and the encouraging inflation
statistics for recent months argued against any near-term policy
adjustment.
Moreover, there was no compelling evidence that current
monetary policy was fostering credit flows usually associated with
speculative excesses or impending increases in price pressures.
Growth in the broad measures of money and in the debt of nonfinancial
sectors remained fairly damped despite indications of greater willingness to supply credit by banks, other financial intermediaries, and
investors in securities markets. With regard to the monetary aggregates, low short-term interest rates undoubtedly were contributing to
large shifts of funds from depository institutions, notably from
components of M2 and M3 to stock and bond mutual funds and to other
financial instruments, and thus to the sluggish behavior of the broad measures of money. In this connection, a staff analysis pointed to
continuing slow growth in M2 over the near term and, on the assumption of little or no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
positions, to growth for the year at a rate around the lower end of
the Committee's range. Growth in M3 was likely to fall marginally
below the Committee's range for the year. On the other hand, growth
in Ml and in various reserve measures was expected to remain
relatively robust.
Turning to possible adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period ahead, the members endorsed a proposal to return to an
unbiased intermeeting instruction that did not incorporate any
presumption with regard to the direction of possible intermeeting
policy changes. The members agreed that the probability of an
intermeeting policy adjustment was relatively remote. Incoming data
on economic activity and prices had reduced concerns that inflation
and inflationary expectations might be worsening. The Committee
retained its fundamental objectives of fostering economic expansion at
a sustainable pace that was consistent with further progress over time toward stable prices. However, it now appeared less likely than at the time of the May and July meetings that the Committee needed to bias its consideration of responses to incoming information in the intermeeting period toward possible tightening in order to achieve those objectives. One member, while agreeing that a tightening move
would not be appropriate under current circumstances, nonetheless believed that monetary policy had been overly stimulative for some time and that the Committee should move toward restraint at the first favorable opportunity.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members expressed a preference for a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
They also indicated their support of a directive that did not include
a presumption about the likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and little net change in M3 over the balance of
the third quarter.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace.
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased in July at a
rate close to its average advance in earlier months of
the year, and the civilian unemployment rate declined
to 6.8 percent. Industrial production turned up in
July after posting small declines in May and June.
Retail sales edged higher in July following a sizable
rise in the second quarter. Housing starts were down
somewhat in July, but permits moved up. Available
indicators point to continued expansion in business
capital spending. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade
deficit declined in May, but for April and May combined
it was larger than its average rate in the first
quarter. After rising at a faster rate in the early
part of the year, consumer prices have changed little
and producer prices have fallen in recent months.
Short-and intermediate-term interest rates have
changed little since the Committee meeting on July 6-7, while yields on long-term Treasury and corporate bonds
have declined somewhat. In foreign exchange markets,
the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies was about unchanged on balance
over the intermeeting period.
After expanding appreciably over the second
quarter, M2 increased slightly further in July and M3
declined. For the year through July, M2 is estimated
to have grown at a rate close to the lower end of the
Committee's range for the year, and M3 at a rate
slightly below its range. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt has expanded at a moderate rate in recent months,
and for the year through June it is estimated to have
increased at a rate in the lower half of the
Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For 1994, the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994,  of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and little net change in M3
over the balance of the third quarter.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan, McDonough, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, McTeer, Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action: None.
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007