FRB: FOMC Minutes--December 20, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of December 20, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 20, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne,1 McTeer, and Stern, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, Sniderman,
Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan. Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and
Dallas respectively
Messrs. Gavin and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston
respectively
Mr. Kuttner, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Mr. Hilton, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
1. Left before discussion of the economic situation.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on November 15, 1994, were approved.
By unanimous vote, the Committee elected Mark S. Sniderman as
Associate Economist from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland to
serve until the next election at the first meeting of the Committee
after December 31, 1994, with the understanding that in the event he
discontinued his official connection with the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, he would cease to have any official connection with the
Federal Open Market Committee.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets since the November meeting. There were no
System open market transactions in foreign currencies during this
period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period November 15, 1994, through December 19, 1994. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested a further
pickup in economic growth in recent months. Consumer spending,
supported by strong expansion of employment and income and by buoyant
consumer sentiment, remained robust. Business capital spending and
exports were rising briskly. Payroll employment remained on a strong
upward trend, and industrial output posted further substantial gains.
Broad indexes of prices of consumer goods and services increased
moderately on average over recent months, although prices of many
industrial materials and intermediate supplies continued to move up
rapidly.
Nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in November after an
appreciable expansion in October. Job gains in the service-producing
sector were stronger in November than in October, as a pickup in
hiring in business services more than offset slower growth in health
services and retail trade. Employment in manufacturing recorded
another sizable advance in November, with increases widespread by
industry. Hiring in construction was up considerably in November
after a small gain in October. Job growth outpaced the expansion of
the labor force in November, and the civilian unemployment rate
declined to 5.6 percent.
Industrial production, led by further increases in
manufacturing output, registered another large gain in November.
Among major market groups, production of business equipment surged and
sizable increases were recorded for the output of materials and
construction supplies. With the growth of production outpacing the
expansion of capacity in November, the rate of utilization of total
industrial capacity moved up further from an already high level.
Retail sales continued to rise rapidly in November. Sales
were up solidly at most types of stores, but gains were particularly
large at durable goods outlets. Consumer spending on services also
had grown significantly in October (latest data), with advances
widespread among categories of services. Housing starts increased
appreciably in November, when construction activity apparently was
boosted by favorable weather in some parts of the country.
Multifamily starts rose in November to their highest level in four
years, while single-family starts retraced a large part of their
October decline.
Business capital spending remained on a pronounced upward
trend. Shipments of nondefense capital goods other than aircraft were
up slightly further in October after having advanced sharply in the
two previous months; shipments of computing equipment were brisk in
October, while shipments of other capital goods were little changed.
With regard to transportation equipment, outlays for aircraft
continued to trend lower in October, while sales of heavy trucks rose
appreciably. Recent data on orders for nondefense capital goods
pointed to continued vigorous expansion of spending on business
equipment. Nonresidential construction activity advanced further in
October, led by higher spending for institutional and public utility
structures. The uptrend in permits suggested further advances in
nonresidential construction.
Business inventory investment was relatively robust in
October. Manufacturing inventories rebounded after a small decline in
September; a sizable amount of the October increase occurred at firms
producing computers, office machinery, and telecommunications
equipment for which demand had been strong. For manufacturing as a
whole, the stocks-to-shipments ratio remained near a historically low
level. Wholesale inventories continued to climb at a pace in line
with sales, and the inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector stayed
near the middle of its range over recent years. Retail inventory
accumulation slowed substantially in October; much of the slowdown
reflected a sharp drop in stocks at automotive dealerships. With
sales up sharply, the inventory-to-sales ratio for the retail sector
fell in October and remained near the middle of its range over recent
years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened somewhat in October from its September level and from its
average rate for the third quarter. The increase in the deficit from
September's level reflected a small decline in the value of exports of
goods and services, which resulted primarily from reduced aircraft
shipments, and a small rise in the value of imports. Economic
activity in the major foreign industrial countries continued to expand
rapidly in the third quarter, and available indicators generally
suggested further substantial gains in the fourth quarter.
Despite further sizable increases in the prices of many goods
at the early stages of processing, inflation at the consumer level
remained moderate in October and November. Energy prices were
unchanged on balance over the two months, while food prices edged
higher. Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices advanced at
a slightly slower rate over October and November than in earlier
months of the year and also increased a little less over the twelve
months ended in November than over the comparable year-earlier period.
At the producer level, prices of finished goods other than food and
energy were down over the October-November period, but they rose by a
little larger amount for the twelve months ended in November than they
had in the year-earlier period. The increase in average hourly
earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers over the October-November period remained in the moderate range that had prevailed for
some time, although a pickup in earnings growth was evident in a few
sectors, notably construction and services. Over the past twelve
months, hourly earnings increased at a slightly faster pace than they
had over the year-earlier period.
At its meeting on November 15, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for a significant increase in the degree of
pressure on reserve positions, taking account of a possible rise of
3/4 percentage point in the discount rate. The Committee did not
include in the directive a presumption about likely further
adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly,
the directive stated that in the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat greater or somewhat lesser reserve restraint
would be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve
conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
On the day of the meeting, the Board of Governors approved a
3/4 percentage point rise in the discount rate, to a level of 4-3/4
percent. The increase in the discount rate was made effective
immediately and was passed through fully to interest rates in the
market for reserves. Open market operations during the intermeeting
period were conducted with a view to maintaining the tighter policy
stance implemented immediately after the meeting, and the federal
funds rate remained near 5-1/2 percent. Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing, reflecting the usual late-autumn pattern of ebbing demand
for seasonal credit, declined over the intermeeting period; actual
borrowing was close to anticipated levels.
Short-term interest rates rose considerably over the period
after the November meeting. These rates had increased before the
meeting in anticipation of a policy tightening move, but the size of
the move was larger than expected and rates firmed a little further as
a result. Over the remainder of the intermeeting interval, short-term
rates responded to incoming economic data, for a time rising in
reaction to indications of continuing strength in economic activity
and later retracing a portion of these increases in response to
favorable news on inflation. Rates on private money-market
instruments with very short maturities also were lifted somewhat in
anticipation of the usual year-end pressures. Long-term rates
declined slightly over the intermeeting period. The more favorable
inflation data, together with the relatively aggressive tightening
action, apparently were viewed by many market participants as
indicating that monetary policy would be sufficiently firm to hold
inflation in check. The revelations in early December of financial
difficulties in Orange County, California and concerns about their
potential spread had a disruptive effect on financial markets, notably
those for municipal securities, but aside from the securities of the
affected communities, the disruption generally was brief. Most major
indexes of equity prices fell, on balance, over the intermeeting
period.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies increased further over the intermeeting period, with
the dollar gaining about equally against the mark and the yen. The
unexpected size of the monetary policy move in November, the economic
news received over the period, and the growing expectation that policy
would be tightened again before long all appeared to contribute to the
dollar's rise.
Growth of M2 resumed in November after several months of
decline. M2's expansion largely reflected sizable inflows to small
time deposits and retail money market funds that in part might have
been associated with accelerated outflows from bond mutual funds and
reduced inflows to stock mutual funds. M3 growth slowed a little in
November as some investors shifted funds from institution-only money
market accounts, whose opportunity costs had widened after the
November policy tightening, into direct holdings of securities. For
the year through November, M2 grew at a rate at the bottom of the
Committee's range for 1994 and M3 at a rate in the lower half of its
range for the year. Total domestic nonfinancial debt had continued to
expand at a moderate rate in recent months, and through October
(latest data) this debt measure had grown at a rate in the lower half
of its monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity would slow markedly over the next few
quarters and then would average less than the rate of increase in the
economy's potential output over the remainder of the forecast horizon.
In the staff's judgment, the economy currently was operating beyond
its long-run noninflationary capacity, and the forecast assumed that
monetary policy would not accommodate any continuing tendency for
aggregate demand to expand at a pace that could foster sustained
higher inflation. Growth of consumer spending was expected to decline
substantially in response to slower income growth, higher borrowing
costs, and reductions in household net worth associated with lower
asset values. Business outlays for new equipment were projected to be
damped considerably by slower growth in sales, higher financing costs,
and declining profits. Homebuilding also was expected to soften in
response to higher financing costs, but the relatively favorable cash-flow affordability of housing was anticipated to act as a partial
offset to those increased costs. The projected robust pace of
economic activity abroad was expected to bolster export demand. With
the economy having exceeded its noninflationary potential in the
staff's judgment, wage and price inflation was projected to pick up
for a period before turning down as pressures on productive resources
eased.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members referred to continuing indications of
robust expansion in employment, output, and spending and to very high
and rising levels of resource utilization. They saw scant evidence at
this point of any moderation in the growth of overall economic
activity, including little apparent response thus far in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy to earlier policy tightening actions.
Several observed that much of the expansionary momentum in the economy
was likely to carry into at least the early part of next year, with
potential inflationary consequences, but a number also commented that
appreciable slowing during the year to a more sustainable and less
inflationary pace remained a reasonable expectation. It was likely
that much of the restraint from the policy firming actions implemented
this year had not yet been experienced; those actions had reversed an
accommodative policy that had been in place through early 1994, the
effects of which probably were still being felt in the latter part of
1994. The members acknowledged that the timing and extent of the
slowing in the expansion were subject to considerable uncertainty.
However, with the economy now operating at or even slightly above its
noninflationary potential, price and wage pressures were likely to
build unless the anticipated slowing occurred relatively soon. Key
measures of inflation including consumer prices, wages, and producer
prices of finished goods did not display any evident uptrend at this
juncture, but this could reflect a delay in the adjustment of
inflation to capacity constraints and possibly some greater
productivity and flexibility in the economy than had been assumed.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, members reported
on regional business conditions, which continued to exhibit local
variations ranging from modest expansion in some areas to robust
growth in others. Reflecting widespread strength in new orders,
manufacturing firms outside the defense industry typically were
operating at high levels of capacity utilization, and there were
numerous anecdotal reports of tightening labor markets. As they had
at earlier meetings, members remarked that despite the increases that
had occurred in interest rates, financial conditions remained
generally supportive of vigorous economic activity. Some noted that
the financial markets were displaying a great deal of resilience and
in particular that they had on balance weathered fairly readily the
recent financial problems of a number of local governments and private
corporations that had experienced large unanticipated losses on their
investments. Banking institutions remained aggressive in their
efforts to extend loans to businesses and consumers.
In their comments on developments in key sectors of the
economy, members noted that consumer spending had increased briskly in
recent months amid indications of favorable consumer sentiment that in
turn undoubtedly reflected the rapid growth in employment and income.
It was still too early to form reliable estimates of retail sales in
the current holiday season. The anecdotal reports pointed to seasonal
increases ranging from moderate to strong in various regions, but some
members emphasized that sales volumes were being buttressed by unusual
promotional efforts, including relatively large discounts. Some
members also commented that consumer debt was growing rapidly and that
increased debt levels were likely to exert a retarding effect on
consumer spending, especially if consumer loan rates were to be
adjusted more fully upward to reflect increases in market interest
rates. Rates on adjustable home mortgages were moving higher to catch
up with market rates and these increases along with the wealth effects
from losses suffered on bond and stock holdings were likely to damp
spending. Up to now, however, the members saw few signs of any
moderation in the growth of consumer spending, including little
apparent effect from somewhat higher interest rates on normally
interest-sensitive spending for motor vehicles and other consumer
durables.
Business fixed investment, which was contributing substantially to the current strength of the expansion, was likely to remain
a positive factor in sustaining the overall growth of the economy
during the year ahead. Even so, as the expansion matured and growth
in final demand tended to moderate, business investment could be
expected to soften. As in the case of consumer spending, however,
there were few signs of any slowing in the current data or anecdotal
reports. Indeed, members saw growing indications of some improvement
in nonresidential construction activity as brisk economic expansion
tended to absorb increasing amounts of previously vacant commercial
and industrial space and prices of such facilities tended to firm. In
the homebuilding sector, the latest available data did not indicate
any weakening in housing construction despite the rise in mortgage
interest rates. However, anecdotal reports from different parts of
the country suggested that the single-family sector might be
weakening. At the same time, construction of multifamily units
continued to exhibit strength in a number of areas, and this sector
appeared to be on a gradual uptrend as falling vacancy rates brought
increases in rents. On balance, some modest softening in overall
housing construction was seen as likely in response to the rise that
had occurred in mortgage interest rates.
Inventory investment was cited as another sector of the
economy that probably would exert a negative influence on economic
activity over the year ahead, though inventory developments are always
subject to a great deal of uncertainty. The strength of inventory
investment in recent quarters reflected efforts to accommodate rapid
growth in final demand and avoid disruptions to production in a period
when supply delivery times were tending to lengthen. Inventory
accumulation might remain elevated for a while longer, but as the
projected slowing in the growth of final demand began to materialize,
business firms were likely to curtail the growth of their
inventories, perhaps sharply for some period, in order to maintain
desired inventory-to-sales ratios.
The government sector constituted another source of
considerable uncertainty in the outlook for 1995. Members referred
to major fiscal policy initiatives that were likely to be considered
in the new Congress, and they discussed possible short-and long-term
effects on the economy. However, the shape of any legislation was
still to be determined and it was not possible at this point to gauge
its effects on government or private spending. On the other hand,
spending by state and local governments was clearly trending higher
and was likely to provide a mild impetus to the overall expansion; the
financial difficulties of some local governments undoubtedly would
serve to curb their spending but were not seen at this point as having
any significant effect on the growth in overall expenditures by state
and local governments.
With regard to the external sector of the economy, members
continued to anticipate strengthening markets for U.S. exports over
the year ahead. Projected growth in exports would be stimulated by
the further expansion of economic activity in major U.S. trading
partners and by the delayed effects of the weakening of the dollar
that had occurred on balance over the course of 1994. Some members
cited anecdotal indications of stronger foreign demand for
agricultural and other goods produced in the United States.
Despite the evidence of vigorous expansion in overall
economic activity and very high levels of resource use, broad measures
of inflation in markets for finished goods and overall wage inflation
had been on the low side of expectations recently. Anecdotal reports
continued to point to very strong competition in most markets for
final goods, and business firms continued to encounter widespread
resistance in their efforts to increase prices as the costs of their
raw materials and other inputs moved higher. Likewise, no uptrend
currently was discernible in broad measures of wages even though labor
markets were widely described as tight and labor shortages appeared to
have increased further recently in some parts of the country. While
examples of upward pressures on wages could be found in a number of
industries, such as construction where there were pronounced shortages
of skilled labor in many local areas, most business firms were
strongly resisting sizable increases in their wages and were making
use of "hiring bonuses" and "performance bonuses" instead of
permanently higher wages to attract or retain workers. At the same
time, job insecurities, including the potential loss of health and
pension benefits, appeared to be holding down labor mobility and
demands for higher compensation. However, many members commented that
rising pressures on capacity, should they persist or intensify, could
be expected to foster greater inflation at some point. Indeed, there
were numerous reports of business plans to raise prices early in the
new year, and a number of members commented that inflation probably
would worsen somewhat over the near term. The subsequent behavior of
prices and wages would depend importantly on fiscal and monetary
policy developments, the extent of inflationary expectations among
businesses and consumers, and the degree of pressure that further
economic expansion would exert on capacity in various industries and
occupations. Given their projections of some moderation in the
business expansion and assuming appropriate fiscal and monetary
policies, the members generally felt that any added inflation emerging
in 1995 would likely be mild and could subside gradually during the
year.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, a majority of the members agreed on the desirability of
maintaining an unchanged policy posture at least through the beginning
of 1995. Monetary policy had been tightened considerably in a series
of steps starting in February, and much of the restraint stemming from
those policy moves had not yet been felt in the economy. This was
especially true with regard to the effects of the latest policy moves
in August and November, which accounted for half the total tightening.
In the circumstances, a pause seemed warranted to give the Committee
more time to assess the underlying strength of the economy and the
impact of previous monetary restraint. This would provide a firmer
basis for gauging the appropriate scope and timing of any further
monetary restraint that might be needed to contain inflation. The
level of real short-term interest rates, which had risen considerably
this year and were now significantly positive, the uniformly sluggish
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and the recent appreciation of
the dollar might indicate that policy was now better positioned to
restrain incipient inflation. It was noted that the Committee might
have gained some leeway to maintain an unchanged policy without
adverse expectational effects in light of the relatively large policy
tightening implemented just a few weeks ago and the publication of
favorable price and wage data that probably had alleviated, at least
temporarily, concerns about future inflation. A number of members
also commented that financial markets might tend to be a bit unsettled
over the balance of the year as a result of the expected year-end
adjustments along with the uncertainty about the effects and incidence
of the sizable market losses incurred by some investors in 1994. In
these circumstances, where there did not appear to be an urgent need
for a further policy move, a number of members viewed conditions in
financial markets as arguing for a steady policy course pending a
reassessment early next year.
A few members expressed a preference for some additional
tightening of policy at this meeting. In their view, the considerable
strength of the economic expansion and the high level of resource
utilization argued for further monetary restraint to counter
inflationary pressures; immediate action also would moderate
inflationary expectations by reinforcing the credibility of the
System's anti-inflationary effort. All but one of these members
indicated, however, that they could accept an unchanged directive that
was biased toward possible firming during the intermeeting period.
On the issue of possible adjustments to policy during the
period until the next meeting, a majority of the members expressed a
preference for an asymmetric directive tilted toward restraint. While
most of these members preferred not to tighten policy at this point,
they believed that the need for further monetary restraint was highly
likely, though it would remain contingent on the tenor of the new
information, including data on holiday retail sales, that would begin
to arrive shortly after the turn of the year. Should the need for
more restraint become apparent, it would be desirable in this view for
the appropriate policy move to be made promptly to arrest any
worsening of inflation and inflationary expectations, thereby
minimizing the cumulative policy tightening that would be required and
the ultimate cost of bringing inflation under control. The Committee
always had the option of adjusting its policy during intermeeting
periods even under a symmetric directive, but the balance of risks in
the outlook argued in the view of these members for a policy reaction
to new information that was best characterized by an asymmetric
directive.
The other members who favored an unchanged policy preferred a
symmetric directive. In their view, the information that would be
released in the weeks immediately ahead was not likely to depart
sufficiently from current expectations to warrant a policy tightening
move during the intermeeting period. Moreover, current forecasts were
subject to some risks in both directions. Those in the direction of
appreciably greater-than-projected slowing in the expansion might have
a relatively low probability, at least over the quarters immediately
ahead, but that risk could not be ruled out and argued for a cautious
approach to any further tightening. Accordingly, the Committee should
wait until the next scheduled meeting when more information, possibly
including a better assessment of the outlook for fiscal policy, would
be available for evaluating the need for any further firming of
monetary policy. One member expressed the view that it would be
desirable to make any further short-run policy moves in the context of
the Committee's long-run strategy to be considered at the next
meeting. Despite their preferences, these members said that they
would not dissent from an asymmetric directive.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
member indicated that they could support a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that included a bias toward the possible firming of reserve conditions
during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable or slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting were
expected to be consistent with modest growth in the broader monetary
aggregates over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
a further pickup in economic growth in recent months.
Nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in November,
and the civilian unemployment rate declined to 5.6
percent. Industrial production registered another
large increase in November and capacity utilization
moved up further from already high levels. Retail
sales have continued to rise rapidly. Housing starts
increased appreciably in November. Orders for
nondefense capital goods point to a continued strong
expansion in spending on business equipment; permits
for nonresidential construction have been trending
higher. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and
services widened somewhat in October from its average
rate in the third quarter. Prices of many materials
have continued to move up rapidly, but broad indexes of
prices for consumer goods and services have increased
moderately on average over recent months.
On November 15, 1994, the Board of Governors
approved an increase from 4 to 4-3/4 percent in the
discount rate, and in line with the Committee's
decision the increase was allowed to show through fully
to interest rates in reserve markets. In the period
since the November meeting, short-term interest rates
have risen considerably while long-term rates have
declined slightly. The trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies recovered
further over the intermeeting period.
Growth of M2 resumed in November after several
months of decline, while M3 expanded moderately
further. For the year through November, M2 grew at a
rate at the bottom of the Committee's range for 1994
and M3 at a rate in the lower half of its range for the
year. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has continued
to expand at a moderate rate in recent months and for
the year-to-date it has grown at a rate in the lower
half of its monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of
1994. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases could
persist during the year and that money growth within
these ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year. For 1995, the Committee agreed
on tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of
1995, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for
M3. The Committee provisionally set the associated
monitoring range for growth of domestic nonfinancial
debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1995. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan,
Kelley, Lindsey, and Parry and Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. LaWare.
Mr. LaWare dissented because he favored an immediate policy
tightening action. In his opinion, the expansion remained quite
strong, with high and increasing levels of utilization in labor and
capital markets, and he saw a serious risk of rising inflation. In
the circumstances, he also feared that a failure by the Committee to
take restraining action could heighten inflationary expectations by
raising concerns about the System's commitment to the objective of
sustainable, noninflationary economic growth.
Temporary Increase in Reciprocal Currency Agreement with Bank of Mexico.
At a meeting conducted via a telephone conference on December
30, 1994, the Committee approved a temporary increase from $3 billion to
$4-1/2 billion in the System's reciprocal currency (swap) agreement with
the Bank of Mexico; it was understood that all drawings, including those
under the permanent tranche of the System's swap agreement with the Bank
of Mexico, would be subject to a determination that appropriate terms
and conditions had been met. The U.S. Treasury also increased its swap
facility with the Bank of Mexico by $1-1/2 billion to $4-1/2 billion,
thereby raising the total for official U.S. facilities to $9.0 billion.
The increases were in response to recent financial developments in
Mexico. The Committee was informed at this meeting that the Bank of
Canada would be considering an increase in its own CAN $1.0 billion
facility with the Bank of Mexico, and that additional official financing
assistance was being negotiated with the other G-10 central banks and
the Bank of Spain.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Blinder, Jordan, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Melzer and Parry and Ms. Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
Absent and not voting: Mr. Forrestal and Ms.
Phillips. Mr. Melzer voted as alternate for Mr.
Forrestal.
Mr. Broaddus dissented because he continued to question the
desirability of the System's foreign exchange market intervention and
therefore the desirability of maintaining or enlarging the swap
arrangements that facilitate them. In his view continued System
participation in such operations with the U.S. Treasury presented an
unacceptable risk of reducing the System's credibility and its ability
to conduct monetary policy effectively. He felt this risk was
particularly high in this instance. Moreover, as at the March 22,
1994, meeting of the Committee, he had serious concerns about the
appropriateness of the foreign exchange operations this particular
enlargement would support. In his view, the expansion of this
arrangement was equivalent in many respects to a fiscal policy
initiative of a kind that should be explicitly authorized by the
Congress.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday-Wednesday, January 31-February 1, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 12:45 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007