FRB: FOMC Minutes--February 3-4, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of February 3-4, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Thursday, February 3, 1994, at 2:30 p.m. and was
continued on Friday, February 4, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, Melzer, Oltman,1 and
Syron, Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, R. Davis, Goodfriend,
Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, Stockton,
and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper,2Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Reinhart,3 Section Chief, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Rosine,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Ms. Krieger, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
1. Attended Thursday session only.
2. Attended Thursday session only.
3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices
of the election of the following members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1,
1994, and ending December 31, 1994, had been received and that the
named individuals had executed their oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
William J. McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with James H. Oltman, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate:
J. Alfred Broaddus, Jr. President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, with Richard F. Syron, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, as alternate:
Jerry L. Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
with Silas Keehn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, as alternate:
Robert P. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,
with Thomas C. Melzer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, as alternate:
Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, with Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31,
1994, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance
of their official connection with the Board of Governors or with a
Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official connection
with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan
Chairman
William J. McDonough
Vice Chairman
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard
Deputy Secretary
Joseph R. Coyne
Assistant Secretary
Gary P. Gillum
Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.
General Counsel
Ernest T. Patrikis
Deputy General Counsel
Michael J. Prell
Economist
Edwin M. Truman
Economist
Jack H. Beebe, John M. Davis,
Richard G. Davis, Marvin S. Goodfriend,
David E. Lindsey, Larry J. Promisel,
Charles J. Siegman, Thomas D. Simpson,
David J. Stockton, and Sheila L. Tschinkel
Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after
December 31, 1994.
By unanimous vote, Joan E. Lovett and Peter R. Fisher were
selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee in the capacities
of Manager for Domestic Operations System Open Market Account, and
Manager for Foreign Operations System Open Market Account,
respectively on the understanding that their selection was subject to
their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Secretary's note: Advice subsequently was received
that the selections indicated above were satisfactory
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
On January 24, 1994, the continuing rules, regulations,
authorizations, and other instruments of the Committee had been
distributed with the advice that, in accordance with procedures
approved by the Committee, they were being called to the Committee's
attention before the February 3-4 organization meeting to give members
an opportunity to raise any questions they might have concerning them.
Members were asked to indicate if they wished to have any of the
instruments in question placed on the agenda for consideration at this
meeting, and no requests for substantive consideration were received.
At this meeting, the members agreed to update the references
to the Management of the System Open Market Account in the following
FOMC documents to reflect the new titles of Manager for Domestic
Operations, System Open Market Account, and Manager for Foreign
Operations, System Open Market Account: (1) FOMC Rules of
Organization. (2) Procedures for Allocation of Securities in the
System Open Market Account, and (3) Program for Security of FOMC
Information. Except for this change, all of the instruments
identified below remained in effect in their existing forms:
1. Procedures for Allocation of Securities in the System Open Market
Account.
2. Authority for the Chairman to appoint a Federal Reserve Bank as
agent to operate the System Account in case the New York Bank is
unable to function.
3. Resolution to Provide for the Continued Operation of the Federal
Open Market Committee During an Emergency.
4. Resolution Authorizing Certain Actions by Federal Reserve Banks
During an Emergency.
5. Resolution Relating to Examinations of the System Open Market
Account.
6. Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency
Issues.
7. Regulation Relating to Open Market Operations of Federal Reserve
Banks.
8. Program for Security of FOMC Information.
9. Federal Open Market Committee Rules of Organization, Rules of
Procedure, and Rules Regarding Availability of Information.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market
Operations shown below was reaffirmed.
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
Reaffirmed February 3, 1994
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out
the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States in the open market, from
or to securities dealers and foreign and international accounts
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash,
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market
Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange maturing
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
provided that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal
agency securities held in such Account (including forward commitments)
at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at
which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $8.0 billion during
the period commencing with the opening of business on the day
following such meeting and ending with the close of business on the
day of the next such meeting:
(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery
basis, for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at
market discount rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up
to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the
current shipment of goods between countries or within the United
States, or (2) arise out of the storage within the United States of
goods under contract of sale or expected to move into the channels of
trade within a reasonable time and that are secured throughout their
life by a warehouse receipt or similar document conveying title to the
underlying goods: provided that the aggregate amount of bankers
acceptances held at any one time shall not exceed $100 million:
(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States, and prime bankers
acceptances of the types authorized for purchase under l(b) above,
from dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, obligations, or
acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates that, unless
otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, shall be determined
by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the
volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the
event Government securities or agency issues covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred
to the System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the
event bankers acceptances covered by any such agreement are not
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held by the
Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities held in
the System Open Market Account to Government securities dealers and to
banks participating in Government securities clearing arrangements
conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as
the Committee may specify from time to time.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments
for foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open
Market Account, to sell U.S. Government securities to such foreign and
international accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph l(a) under
agreements providing for the resale by such accounts of those
securities within 15 calendar days on terms comparable to those
available on such transactions in the market: and (b) for New York
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to
the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in
paragraph l(c), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase
agreements between its own account and foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a
service fee when appropriate.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Foreign Currency
Operations was amended to reflect the new title of Manager for Foreign
Operations, System Open Market Account.
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
Amended February 3, 1994
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to
the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency
directive and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions as the
Committee may issue from time to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the
form of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the
open market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U.S.
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with
other international financial institutions:
Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Netherlands guilders
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts
to receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A
above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph
2 below, provided that drawings by either party to any such
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee,
because of exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies
not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall open
position in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding
signs) of net positions in individual currencies. The net position in
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus
outstanding contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as
the sum of these elements with due regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap"
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew
such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank
Amount of arrangement
(millions of dollars equivalent)
Austrian National Bank
250
National Bank of Belgium
1,000
Bank of Canada
2,000
National Bank of Denmark
250
Bank of England
3,000
Bank of France
2,000
German Federal Bank
6,000
Bank of Italy
3,000
Bank of Japan
5,000
Bank of Mexico
700
Netherlands Bank
500
Bank of Norway
250
Bank of Sweden
300
Swiss National Bank
4,000
Bank for International Settlements:
Dollars against Swiss francs
600
Dollars against authorized European currencies other than Swiss francs
1,250
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the
proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall
be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph
l.A. above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, be at prevailing market rates. For the purpose of
providing an investment return on System holdings of foreign
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or
received in connection with swap drawings, transactions with foreign
central banks may be undertaken at non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In
making operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System
holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign
banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of
Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the
Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested insofar as
practicable, considering needs for minimum working balances. Such
investments shall be in liquid form, and generally have no more than
12 months remaining to maturity. When appropriate in connection with
arrangements to provide investment facilities for foreign currency
holdings. U.S. Government securities may be purchased from foreign
central banks under agreements for repurchase of such securities
within 30 calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs
shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and
the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the
Board of Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman
may designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on
the Subcommittee, other Board members designated by the Chairman as
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee,
his alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the
request of any member, or at the request of the Manager for Foreign
Operations, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes
of reviewing recent or contemplated operations and of consulting with
the Manager on other matters relating to his responsibilities. At the
request of any member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such
reviews and consultations shall be referred for determination to the
Federal Open Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about
the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between
the System and the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary
on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary
and Financial Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit
pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to
appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign
currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph
3.G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect
to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.
By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive shown below
was reaffirmed.
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
Reaffirmed February 3, 1994
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be
directed at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that
market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar reflect actions and behavior
consistent with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign
exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with
selected foreign central banks and with the Bank for International
Settlements.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other
countries and with international monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs
for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and Treasury commitments
in particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of the Exchange
Stabilization Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the
Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the
United States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary
authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United
States in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange
arrangements under the IMF Article IV.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions With Respect
to Foreign Currency Operations shown below were amended to reflect the
new title of Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market
Account.
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
Amended February 3, 1994
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager
for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall
be guided by the following procedural understandings with respect to
consultations and clearances with the Committee, the Foreign Currency
Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the Committee. All operations
undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly to
the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on
any day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the
Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with
repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change
in the System's net position in that currency might be less than the
limits specified in l.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the
Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the
full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion
since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the
Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System and about any
operations that are not of a routine character.
Agreement to "Warehouse" Foreign Currencies
At its meeting on February 2-3, 1993, the Committee had
reaffirmed the $5 billion limit on the amount of eligible foreign
currencies that the System was prepared to "warehouse" for the
Treasury and the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF). The purpose of
the warehousing facility is to supplement, at the discretion of the
Federal Reserve, the U.S. dollar resources of the Treasury and the ESF
for financing their purchases of foreign currencies and related
international operations. There had been no use of this facility
since a ESF repayment of $2 billion on April 2, 1992. The Committee
decided at this meeting to reaffirm the $5 billion ceiling which it
viewed as providing adequate operational flexibility to respond on
short notice to unanticipated developments.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Broaddus, Forrestal, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Vote against this action: Mr. Jordan.
Absent and not voting: Messrs. Angell and
Mullins.
Mr. Jordan dissented because he felt that providing funds to
the Treasury using a warehousing arrangement was, in effect, a loan to
the Treasury. In his opinion, direct financing of government
operations by the central bank is inappropriate and could compromise
the effective conduct of monetary policy. He did not rule out the
possible efficacy of some warehousing transactions in very exceptional
circumstances in the future, but he believed that the latter should be
approved only after full Committee discussion. Accordingly, he did
not want to retain the standing $5 billion authorization.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on December 21,
1993, were approved.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets during the period since the December
meeting. There were no System open market transactions in foreign
currencies during this period, and thus no vote was required of the
Committee.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period December 21, 1993, through February 3, 1994. By unanimous
vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in
1994, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting
period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial information
available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion
is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was
approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting indicated that
economic activity recorded a strong advance during the closing months
of 1993, and the limited data available on production and employment
suggested appreciable further gains in the early weeks of this year.
Housing starts had strengthened substantially in the fourth quarter of
last year, and business fixed investment had registered a sharp rise.
Increases in broad indexes of consumer and producer prices, excluding
their food and energy components, had been somewhat larger in recent
months than earlier in 1993, and prices of a number of commodities had
turned up.
Assessment of the January labor market data was complicated
by statistical revisions and weather-related reporting problems, but a
variety of indicators pointed convincingly to a further strengthening
in the demand for labor. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted
a small gain in January after a sizable December increase.
Manufacturing employment rose for a fourth consecutive month, with
gains again concentrated in motor vehicles. Construction payrolls
edged down, evidently reflecting the adverse effects of severe winter
weather. The total number of jobs in the services industries was
unchanged in January, but the inclement weather apparently held down
employment in some segments of this sector as well. The average
workweek of production or nonsupervisory workers rose in January to
its highest level in almost five years; for manufacturing, the average
workweek remained at its post-World War II high for a third
consecutive month. The civilian unemployment rate, calculated on a
new basis, was 6.7 percent in January.
Industrial production increased appreciably further in
December, and the available information suggested a considerable rise
in January. In December, the advance in manufacturing was led by the
motor vehicle and computing equipment industries. Sizable increases
in materials and construction supplies also were recorded. On the
other hand, the output of consumer goods other than motor vehicles was
sluggish, and the production of aircraft and defense and space
equipment continued to shrink. Total utilization of manufacturing
capacity rose again in December and reached a relatively high level,
judged against historical experience.
Consumer spending, as measured by real personal consumption
expenditures, posted another solid increase in the fourth quarter, and
strong sales of motor vehicles in January suggested continued buoyancy
in consumer demand. In the fourth quarter, real outlays on motor
vehicles surged, and spending on other durable goods--notably
furniture, appliances and other household equipment--registered
further large gains. By contrast, real outlays for nondurable goods
and services rose only moderately. Housing starts jumped in December,
with both single-family and multifamily starts sharing in the advance.
For 1993 as a whole, housing starts were at their highest annual total
in four years. Sales of new homes were up sharply in November, and
sales of existing homes ended the year at the highest monthly level in
the twenty-five year history of the series.
Real business fixed investment recorded a very large increase
in the fourth quarter. Business spending for equipment, notably for
information processing equipment, was up sharply for a seventh
straight quarter. The strength evident in recent orders for
nondefense capital goods pointed to further gains in shipments of
these goods in early 1994. Outlays for nonresidential structures in
the fourth quarter posted their largest quarterly rise in six years;
the increases were spread across a broad array of categories other
than office buildings. Construction permits continued to rise in the
fourth quarter, suggesting further growth of investment in
nonresidential structures in the near term.
Business inventories remained generally well aligned with
sales through November, the most recent month for which complete data
were available. In manufacturing, inventory stocks fell in December
after edging lower in November: with brisk gains in shipments in both
months, the ratio of stocks to shipments fell further from levels that
already were low by historical standards. At the wholesale level,
inventories rose moderately in November after little change in the
preceding two months. The inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector
had changed little since May. Retail inventories expanded
substantially in November for a third straight month. The buildup of
stocks might have been in anticipation of robust holiday sales, but
for some retail businesses, particularly general merchandise stores,
the increases coincided with weak sales. For the retail sector as a
whole, the inventory-to-sales ratio was up slightly in November.
The average nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit for the
October-November period was about the same as its average rate in the
third quarter. The value of exports was up for the two-month period,
with the increase occurring largely in machinery, automotive products,
and aircraft. The higher value of imports for the two-month period
reflected, as had been the case earlier in 1993, greater imports of
consumer goods, automotive products, and machinery. Trends in
economic activity in the major foreign industrial countries appeared
to have diverged further in the fourth quarter. Moderate growth
appeared to be continuing in Canada and the United Kingdom, but
economic activity seemed to be growing more slowly or to have turned
down in Japan, western Germany, and France.
Producer prices of finished goods were down slightly in
December after being unchanged in November. Excluding the food and
energy components, producer prices edged higher in December and were
up slightly for the year as a whole. At the retail level, consumer
prices rose modestly in November and December, with energy price
declines holding down the increase in the overall index. For items
other than food and energy, prices advanced in the two months at a
slightly faster pace than that seen over previous months of the year;
for 1993 as a whole, the increase was about the same as in 1992.
Hourly compensation of private industry workers increased in the
fourth quarter at the same pace as in the third quarter. For 1993,
the rise in hourly compensation was little changed from the previous
year. Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
rose sharply in January, but for the twelve months ended in January,
the increase was the same as that recorded for the previous twelve
months.
At its meeting on December 21, 1993, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and
M3 over the following months.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. Additional reserves were supplied to the banking
system on a temporary basis around year-end to meet seasonal movements
in currency and required reserves as well as an enlarged demand for
excess reserves. For the intermeeting period as a whole, the federal
funds rate remained close to 3 percent while adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing averaged somewhat more than anticipated.
Most market interest rates declined slightly during the
intermeeting period, and major indexes of stock prices posted new
highs. Market participants saw the incoming news on inflation as
encouraging; still, they viewed the economy as relatively robust, and
on balance they deemed a firming of monetary policy to counteract a
potential buildup of inflation pressures as likely in the next few
months, but probably not in the very near term.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies changed little on balance
over the intermeeting period. The dollar fell against the yen in the
context of somewhat higher Japanese interest rates and renewed
expressions of U.S. concern about bilateral trade issues. The dollar
appreciated slightly relative to the German mark and other European
currencies against the background of relatively strong U.S. economic
data and generally sluggish economic activity in continental Europe.
Growth of the broad monetary aggregates, though a little
faster than in most of 1993, remained relatively slow over December
and January. Investors evidently continued to find low-yielding
deposits less appealing than stock and bond mutual funds, although
recent inflows to bond funds appeared to have been at a slower rate
than that seen over most of 1993. For the year 1993, growth of both
M2 and M3 was estimated to have been slightly above the lower ends of
the Committee's ranges. Private borrowing had picked up in recent
months, and total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a somewhat
faster, though still moderate, pace in the fourth quarter; for the
year, nonfinancial debt was estimated to have been in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic expansion would slow from the very strong pace of the fourth
quarter, but that the economy still would advance in 1994 at a rate
somewhat in excess of the growth of potential. The severe winter
weather over much of the country and the California earthquake would
tend to distort economic indicators for the early part of the year:
however, taken together, these developments were not expected to have
a material or lasting effect on the overall level of activity or
prices. Consumer spending, which for some time had tended to outpace
the growth of disposable income, was projected to increase at a rate
more in line with incomes. Business fixed investment was expected to
decelerate gradually from the very rapid rate of 1993, reflecting the
diminishing effect of the earlier pickup in output growth, the slower
growth of corporate cash flow, and a less rapid decline in the cost of
capital. Homebuilding activity, driven by the greatly improved
affordability of housing and increased confidence in employment
prospects, was anticipated to continue at a relatively brisk pace
through much of the year. Exports were projected to strengthen
somewhat, bolstered by some pickup in foreign economic growth, and
fiscal restraint was expected to exert a reduced drag on spending. In
light of the limited margins of slack in labor and product markets
that were anticipated to prevail over the forecast horizon, the
ongoing expansion was projected to be associated with only a slight
further reduction in the core rate of inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the economy had entered
the new year with appreciable forward momentum and that the expansion
was likely to be sustained over the year ahead at a pace somewhat
above the economy's long-run potential. The very rapid rate of
economic growth now indicated for the fourth quarter of 1993 clearly
could not be maintained. Much of the recent impetus to the expansion
stemmed from a surge in expenditures on housing, business equipment,
and consumer durables. Such spending had reached a very high level in
relation to underlying demands so that the pace of additional
increases undoubtedly would moderate during the course of 1994.
Still, the economic expansion seemed to have considerable momentum,
largely as a consequence of diminishing balance sheet constraints and
generally favorable financial conditions spurred by a highly
accommodative monetary policy. As a consequence, a number of members
expressed the view that the risks were on the upside of a moderate
growth forecast. In the context of low and decreasing slack in the
economy, little further progress would be made toward price stability
in 1994, and there was a distinct risk of higher inflation at some
point if monetary policy were not adjusted. While broad measures of
inflation did not on the whole suggest any changes in inflation
trends, some members noted that a number of commodity prices had
turned up in recent months, and they referred to still scattered but
increasing anecdotal reports that some business firms were paying
slightly higher prices for various materials purchased for use in the
production process.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt
aggregates, the Committee members and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had prepared projections
of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and inflation for
1994. The central tendency of the forecasts pointed to somewhat
faster economic growth this year than currently was estimated for
1993. The anticipated rate of economic expansion was expected to
foster a limited further drop in the rate of unemployment by the
fourth quarter of this year. With the slack in productive resources
expected to diminish further to a quite low level, price and cost
pressures were unlikely to abate significantly: indeed, price
increases in 1994 could exceed those of 1993 when inflation had been
held down by favorable developments in energy prices. Measured from
the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994, the
forecasts for growth of real GDP had a central tendency of 3 to 3-1/4
percent and a full range of 2-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent. Projections of
the civilian rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter of 1994 were
all in a range of 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent calculated on the basis of
the new survey recently introduced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
For the CPI, the central tendency of the forecasts for the period from
the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994 was centered
on increases of about 3 percent within a range of 2-1/4 to 4 percent,
and for nominal GDP the forecasts were clustered in a range of 5-1/2
to 6 percent for the year.
In the Committee's review of factors underlying recent
developments, members observed that generally favorable financial
conditions provided a backdrop conducive to further robust expansion
in business activity. Much of the recent strengthening in economic
growth was generated by increased spending in interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy such as housing in response to relatively low
interest rates. Generally buoyant equity markets, a readier
availability of financing from lending institutions, and the
strengthened financial condition of businesses and households also
were cited as factors tending to boost economic activity. Balance
sheet restructuring activities appeared to have slackened markedly,
and while balance sheet adjustments probably were still being made,
the latter seemed to be exerting much less restraint on the
willingness of businesses and especially households to spend and to
incur new debt to finance growing expenditures.
In their reports on developments across the nation, members
commented on widespread indications of improving economic activity,
including some strengthening in regions that earlier were
characterized by stagnant business conditions. Some areas continued
to be affected adversely by special factors, especially by spending
cutbacks in defense and aerospace industries. California was a
notable example, but a range of indicators suggested that the
California economy might be stabilizing, albeit at a depressed level.
after an extended period of declining activity. Mirroring these
developments, business sentiment was characterized as generally
optimistic around the nation. While business executives remained
cautious in their hiring practices, the expansion in business activity
was fostering sizable overall gains in employment even in areas where
some major business concerns were reducing their workforces. A few
large firms that previously had frozen or reduced their payrolls were
now reported to be hiring additional workers.
Turning to prospective developments in key sectors of the
economy, the members anticipated that the expansion in consumer
expenditures would be well maintained during 1994, though the growth
in such spending probably would moderate to a pace more in line with
gains in disposable income. The available data on retail sales since
the holiday period were still limited, but anecdotal reports pointed
to continuing momentum in several parts of the country. Winter storms
had hindered sales in a number of areas, but according to some retail
contacts the adverse effects were likely to be temporary. In any
event, the very rapid rates of growth in sales of automobiles and
other consumer durables were not sustainable, and already high
consumer debt ratios would be a further inhibiting factor. It was
noted in this connection that consumer debt had become more
concentrated over the course of recent years among consumer groups
that were most likely to borrow to help finance their spending, with
the result that the ability of such consumers to incur additional
indebtedness could be diminished. Higher taxes confronting some
households also were cited as a negative factor in the outlook for the
consumer sector. On balance, however, while the prospects for
consumer spending clearly were not free of uncertainty, the marked
improvement in consumer confidence and favorable financial conditions
would provide a setting conducive to sustained moderate growth in
consumer expenditures.
The improvement in consumer sentiment together with the
availability of relatively low cost financing had fostered very strong
growth in housing construction over the closing months of 1993 and,
adjusting for seasonal weather conditions, anecdotal reports from many
areas suggested a continued robust performance in this sector of the
economy in the early weeks of this year. The strength in housing
activity had induced increases in the costs of lumber and other
building materials, and shortages of skilled construction workers were
reported in some areas. Despite these developments, prices of new
homes did not appear at this point to be under significant upward
pressure. Looking ahead, with housing construction already at high
levels, further gains over the course of 1994 were expected to be
substantially below those recorded in recent quarters.
Business fixed investment was likely to be sustained by
continuing efforts to modernize production facilities in order to
achieve more efficient operations in highly competitive domestic and
world markets. The gains in such investment had been concentrated in
expenditures for equipment, and while new orders pointed to further
brisk growth in the months ahead, increases in such expenditures were
likely to moderate over time. At the same time, growing economic
activity and associated declines in commercial and industrial vacancy
rates, at least in some parts of the country, suggested that nonresidential building construction other than office structures would post
sizable increases over the year. Rebuilding activity following the
earthquake in California would stimulate engineering and construction
in the Los Angeles area over the quarters ahead.
Fiscal policy and foreign trade had exerted retarding effects
on the economy in 1993. While the response of the economy to fiscal
restraint and the outlook for export markets remained subject to
substantial uncertainty, both fiscal policy and the trade deficit were
expected at this point to be less negative factors in the performance
of the economy during 1994. With regard to the outlook for fiscal
policy, the downtrend in defense spending was projected to moderate
and to contribute to a smaller net decline in overall federal
government expenditures on goods and services in 1994. It was noted
that the widespread political support of efforts to curtail federal
government deficits could be expected to continue to contain new
federal spending initiatives. With regard to the outlook for U.S.
exports, more accommodative fiscal or monetary policies abroad were
expected to foster a gradual improvement in rates of economic growth
in major foreign industrial countries with beneficial effects on the
demand from those countries for U.S. goods and services. One member
also commented that NAFTA already seemed to be having a favorable
effect on some exports to Mexico.
One sector of the economy that was viewed as a source of
particular uncertainty was the outlook for inventories. Business
firms continued to maintain tight control over their inventories, and
in general the latter were at quite low levels in relation to sales.
Indeed, there were some anecdotal reports that inventory shortfalls
had resulted in the loss of sales in recent months. Lean inventory
levels in the context of diminishing slack in labor and product
markets raised concerns about the potential for increasing capacity
pressures should strong demands persist that would tend to deplete
existing inventories and lead to efforts not only to rebuild but to
increase them. Thus far, there were few signs of developments such as
significant increases in delivery lead times or in the costs of goods
purchased by business firms that in the past had triggered substantial
inventory buildups. However, there were ample precedents in the
history of business cycle expansions of efforts to accumulate large
inventories in periods when strong final demands already were exerting
inflationary pressures in the economy.
The members generally expressed concern about a buildup in
inflationary pressures during the year ahead, especially if what they
currently viewed as a very accommodative monetary policy were
maintained. A number of members emphasized that even with the
substantial slowing that they anticipated in the rate of economic
expansion from the very rapid growth in the fourth quarter, overall
margins of slack in labor and product markets, already reduced to
fairly modest levels, would shrink further in the quarters ahead with
the clear possibility that various imbalances and added inflation
would emerge in the absence of monetary tightening actions.
Continuing upward impetus to food prices, resulting from the adverse
weather conditions during 1993, and the likelihood that energy prices
would not decline further and might in fact turn up in an environment
of somewhat stronger worldwide demand for energy products could add to
overall price pressures.
The members acknowledged that broad measures of prices and
wages had displayed mixed patterns over recent months and that on the
whole they did not yet point to any clear change in inflation trends.
However, some other indicators were more disquieting. One example was
the growing, though still limited, number of anecdotal reports of
shortages of skilled workers in some parts of the country or
occupations, notably construction. Moreover, there were more reports
of rising prices for products being purchased by business firms for
use in the production process and in turn of successful efforts by
businesses to raise their own prices in order to pass on higher costs
or to improve their profit margins. More generally, many commodity
prices had increased over the past several weeks. On the positive
side, competitive pressures remained intense in many markets,
augmented in markets for numerous products by competition from foreign
producers. Some members also commented that the tradeoff between
economic growth and inflation would be improved over the year ahead to
the extent that the credibility of the System's anti-inflationary
policy was maintained.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates in 1994 that it had established on a tentative basis
at its meeting on July 6-7, 1993. The tentative ranges included
expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of
1994. The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt had been set provisionally at 4 to 8 percent for 1994. All of
these ranges were unchanged from those that the Committee had set for
1993: the latter had been adjusted down to take account of ongoing
increases in velocity.
In the Committee's discussion of the ranges for 1994, which
tended to focus on M2, all the members expressed a preference for
affirming the M2 and M3 ranges that had been established on a provisional basis in July and all but one favored adopting the provisional
monitoring range for nonfinancial debt, that member preferred a lower
range. Many of the members commented on the uncertainties that
surrounded the establishment of ranges that were consistent with the
Committee's goals for the economy. They noted that a variety of
developments had altered the historical relationships between the
monetary aggregates and broad measures of economic performance over
the past several years. The resulting uncertainty implied that the
Committee needed to retain a flexible approach to the behavior of the
monetary aggregates in relation to their ranges, including the need to
assess a broad array of other indicators to gauge the implications of
monetary growth developments. Nonetheless, the members concluded that
as best they could evaluate evolving financial conditions at this
point, monetary growth within the tentative ranges would be likely to
promote the Committee's objectives of sustained economic expansion and
subdued inflation.
In 1993, both M2 and M3 had grown at rates about 1/2 percentage point above the lower bounds of the ranges that the Committee now
contemplated retaining for 1994. According to a staff analysis
prepared for this meeting, somewhat faster growth in both of these
aggregates could be expected in 1994. But with nominal GDP also
expected to be stronger, as indicated by the central tendency of the
members' forecasts, the velocity of M2 would continue to rise at an
appreciably faster rate than historical relationships would have
suggested. This assessment assumed that households would continue to
redirect savings from M2-type accounts to higher-yielding investments,
especially bond and stock mutual funds. However, such redeployments
of funds should moderate this year to the extent that some investors
already had accomplished a considerable portion of their desired
portfolio reallocations and in light of the possibility that changes
in the prices of stocks and bonds, including the drop in bond prices
in recent months, would underline the risks of holding such
instruments. Moreover, depository institutions had strengthened their
capital positions markedly and were likely to compete more aggressively
for M2 and especially for M3-type deposits in an effort to maintain or
increase their role in the financing of expanding economic activity.
While these developments and their implications for monetary growth
could not be forecast with confidence, the members believed that the
ranges under consideration would probably be sufficiently wide to
accommodate M2 and M3 growth rates under a variety of likely velocity
scenarios. For example, if the factors that had tended to depress the
growth of the broad aggregates in relation to income did not abate as
expected this year, M2 and M3 growth would again be near the lower
bounds of the Committee's ranges. Alternatively, if the behavior of
these aggregates were to move closer to earlier patterns, growth in
the upper portions of the ranges would foster an economic performance
in line with the members' forecasts.
From the perspective of a longer time horizon, many of the
members noted that the provisional range for M2 was essentially at a
level that could well prove to be consistent with sustained and
noninflationary economic expansion. This conclusion assumed that
historical relationships between money growth and the expansion of
broad measures of economic performance would be restored at some
point. In the absence of such a development or the emergence of new,
reasonably stable relationships, the Committee would have to continue
to place diminished reliance on the monetary aggregates in the
formulation of monetary policy.
With regard to the range for nonfinancial debt, the members
anticipated that its growth this year would remain within the contemplated range. A staff analysis suggested that its federal borrowing
component would decrease as a result of the ongoing effects of deficit
reduction measures that had been enacted and the rise in tax receipts
stemming from economic growth. At the same time, borrowing by the
nonfederal sectors should strengthen further against the backdrop of
more comfortable financial positions and the expected pickup in GDP
expansion. In one view, however, a somewhat lower range was desirable
for nonfinancial debt. In light of the shift in business preferences
away from debt and toward equity, debt velocity could increase and
slower growth in debt would be consistent with the Committee's
objectives. However, this member could accept the higher range
favored by the other members for 1994.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they favored or could accept the ranges for
1994 that the Committee had established on a tentative basis at its
meeting in July 1993. In keeping with the Committee's usual
procedures under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the ranges would be
reviewed at midyear, or sooner if deemed necessary, in light of the
behavior of the aggregates and interim economic and financial
developments. The Committee approved the following paragraph for
inclusion in the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth
quarter of 1994. The Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases
could persist during the year and that money growth
within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: None.
Absent and not voting: Messrs. Angell and
Mullins.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, the members favored an adjustment toward a less
accommodative policy stance, though views differed to some extent with
regard to the amount of the adjustment. The current policy posture,
which had been in effect since the late summer of 1992, was highly
stimulative as evidenced, for example, by very low or even slightly
negative real short-term interest rates and, in the view of at least
some members, the relatively rapid growth over an extended period in
narrow measures of money and reserves. Such a policy had been
appropriate in a period when various developments had tended to
inhibit the expansion, including widespread efforts to repair strained
balance sheets and a variety of business restructuring activities that
had tended to depress confidence and spending. More recently, the
considerable progress made by households and businesses in decreasing
their debt service burdens and the much strengthened capital positions
of lending institutions had provided a financial basis, in the context
of low interest rates, for growth in demands on productive capacity
that could generate inflation pressures. In this situation, the
members agreed that monetary policy should be adjusted toward a more
neutral stance that would encourage sustained economic growth without
a buildup of inflationary imbalances. The members recognized that
timely action was needed to preclude the necessity for more vigorous
and disruptive policy moves later if inflationary pressures were
allowed to intensify. The history of past cyclical upswings had
demonstrated the inflationary consequences and adverse effects on
economic activity of delayed anti-inflation policy actions.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, a number of
members endorsed a policy move that would involve only a slight
adjustment toward a less accommodative degree of reserve pressure.
These members recognized that evolving economic conditions might well
justify a somewhat greater policy adjustment. They believed, however,
that even a slight move at this time was likely to have a particularly
strong impact on financial markets because it would be the first
policy change after a long hiatus and indeed the first tightening
action in about five years. The market effect might be amplified by a
contemplated decision to authorize the Chairman to announce the policy
action (discussed below). In the circumstances, these members felt
that a somewhat greater policy adjustment would incur an unacceptable
risk of dislocative repercussions in financial markets. A relatively
small move would readily accomplish the purposes of signaling the
Committee's anti-inflation resolve and together with expected further
action should help to temper or avert an increase in inflation
expectations and speculative developments in financial markets.
Other members indicated a preference for a somewhat greater
firming action that would move monetary policy closer to a desirable
neutral stance. In this view, recent developments in the economy had
demonstrated that monetary policy was much too accommodative and that
slow, gradual tightening moves risked allowing inflation pressures to
build. A more decisive policy move at this juncture would in fact
reduce uncertainty, because fewer discrete actions would be required
and they would have a more pronounced and desirable effect in curbing
inflationary sentiment and thus in minimizing upward pressures on
longer-term interest rates over time. The result would be a policy
stance that was more consistent with sustained economic expansion and
progress toward price stability.
In further discussion, all the members indicated that they
could accept the proposed slight policy adjustment at this point, but
many observed that additional firming probably would be desirable
later. The members did not see any unusual likelihood that a further
policy action would be needed during the intermeeting period, and the
Committee therefore decided to retain an unbiased intermeeting
instruction in the directive. In this connection, it was understood
that the Committee would be prepared to review its policy stance and
take further action, if warranted by intermeeting developments, at a
telephone conference during the period ahead.
At this meeting, Committee members discussed and agreed on a
proposal to have the Chairman announce the Committee's short-term
policy decision promptly. The purpose of such an announcement, which
would be a departure from past Committee practice, was to avoid any
misinterpretation of the Committee's action and its purpose. Because
this would be the first tightening policy action in a long time, it
was likely to attract considerable attention. The Committee did not
intend this announcement to set any precedents or to imply any
commitments regarding the announcement of its decisions in the future.
That matter would be reviewed along with other issues relating to the
disclosure of Committee information at a later meeting.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they could support a directive that called for
a slight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, the
Committee decided that in the context of its long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the first half of 1994.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting indicates
a strong advance in economic activity during the
closing months of 1993, and the limited data available
for the early weeks of this year suggest appreciable
further gains. The January labor market data were
complicated by statistical revisions and weather-related reporting problems; however, a variety of
indicators pointed convincingly to a continuing
expansion of employment. Industrial production
increased sharply in the fourth quarter and appears to
have risen considerably further in January. Consumer
spending and housing activity posted solid gains in
late 1993, and strong sales of motor vehicles in
January suggested continued buoyancy in consumer
demand. Trends in contracts and orders point to
further sizable gains in business fixed investment.
The average nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit in
October-November was about the same as its average rate
in the third quarter. Over the latter part of 1993,
increases in broad indexes of consumer and producer
prices, excluding their food and energy components, were somewhat larger than earlier in the year and
prices of a number of commodities also turned up
recently.
Most market interest rates have declined slightly
since the Committee meeting on December 21. 1993. In
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of
the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies is
about unchanged over the intermeeting period.
Growth of M2 and M3 was relatively slow over
December and January. From the fourth quarter of 1992
to the fourth quarter of 1993, M2 and M3 are estimated
to have grown at rates slightly above the lower ends of
the Committee's ranges for the year. Private borrowing
has picked up in recent months and total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a moderate rate in the
fourth quarter; for the year, nonfinancial debt is
estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth
quarter of 1994. The Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases
could persist during the year and that money growth
within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the
first half of 1994.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan. Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: None.
Absent and not voting: Messrs. Angell and
Mullins.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, March 22, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 11:45 a.m.
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007