FRB: FOMC Minutes--March 22, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of March 22, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 22, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, Melzer, and Oltman,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Ms. Minehan, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, Goodfriend, Promisel,
Siegman, Simpson, Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald,
Lang, Rolnick, and Scheld, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York.
Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Cox, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas
Mr. Hilton, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
By unanimous vote, the minutes of actions taken at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on February 3-4,
1994, were approved.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets and on System transactions in foreign
currencies during the period February 4, 1994, through March 21, 1994.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period February 4, 1994, through March 21, 1994. By unanimous vote,
the Committee ratified these transactions.
By unanimous vote, paragraph l(a) of the Authorization for
Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $8 billion
to $11 billion the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System
Account holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities for
the intermeeting period ending with the close of business on May 17,
1994.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting indicated that
economic activity had expanded appreciably further in the early months
of 1994, despite unusually severe winter weather. Consumer spending
and construction activity had been held down to some extent by the
adverse weather conditions, but motor vehicle production had continued
at a very strong pace and business fixed investment appeared to be
headed for a significant gain in the first quarter. Factory
utilization rates had moved still higher, and labor demand seemed to
have grown moderately further. Outside of a surge in energy prices,
increases in broad indexes of consumer and producer prices remained
moderate.
Nonfarm payroll employment was unchanged in January but
posted a February advance comparable to the sizable monthly increases
recorded in the final quarter of 1993. Employment in the service
industries declined slightly in January, then rebounded substantially
in February. Manufacturing payrolls rose in January and February, but
the number of jobs in construction declined in both months, reflecting
that industry's vulnerability to weather disruptions. The civilian
unemployment rate, calculated on the new basis, fell to 6.5 percent in
February: however, the Bureau of Labor Statistics cautioned that a
variety of technical factors might have exaggerated the decline in
joblessness in early 1994.
After a sharp rise in the fourth quarter, industrial
production increased considerably further in January and February.
Manufacturing output continued to rise, despite the apparent damping
effect of adverse weather on a number of industries. Assemblies of
motor vehicles remained quite buoyant, accounting for more than half
of the increase in manufacturing production in the first two months of
the year and reaching in February their highest level since the late
1970s. Production of manufactured goods other than motor vehicles
also was up in the two months, but the advances were smaller than
those of late 1993. Output of utilities surged in-January, reflecting
the heating demand resulting from abnormally cold temperatures, but
a portion of that gain was retraced in February. Total utilization of
industrial capacity increased in both January and February and was at
relatively elevated levels, judged by historical norms; operating
rates in primary processing industries were especially high.
Retail sales were little changed on balance over the first
two months of the year, with sales recovering in February from a large
January decline. By contrast, sales of motor vehicles remained quite
brisk on average over the two months, despite the California
earthquake and the severe weather. Soaring outlays for home heating
contributed to rapid growth of consumer spending on services in
January. The unusual weather also affected housing activity; starts
were down considerably in January and February from the very high
levels of late 1993, and new home sales plunged in January. Sales of
existing homes in January were only slightly below their high December
level.
The limited available evidence pointed to a noticeably
smaller gain in business fixed investment in the first quarter of 1994
after a very large increase in the previous quarter. Shipments of
nondefense capital goods slowed in January, retracing part of the
sharp rise of the fourth quarter, but the buoyancy of orders in recent
months pointed to a further increase in shipments in coming months.
Sales of heavy trucks were strong in January, and the backlog of
orders for such vehicles remained large. Nonresidential construction
activity, perhaps owing in part to bad weather, was down in January
after trending up over most of 1993. The largest decline was in
office building, which had posted large increases in the preceding two
months.
Business inventories fell slightly in January, and stocks
were lean, especially at manufacturing firms. Inventories in
manufacturing rose, retracing in January part of a large December
decline; much of the January increase was at producers of machinery, where stocks had fallen to very low levels relative to shipments. At
both the wholesale and retail levels, inventories posted sizable
decreases. In the wholesale sector, the inventory-to-sales ratio
edged down and had changed little since May of last year. The
inventory-to-sales ratio for the retail sector was up slightly,
reflecting weak sales in January.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services,
measured on the new balance-of-payments basis, was slightly smaller in
January than the average for the fourth quarter. However, the January
deficit was substantially larger than that of December, with exports
down by more than imports. Much of the reduction in exports was in
agricultural goods, aircraft, and gold; the drop in imports mainly
reflected both lower quantities and lower prices of imported oil. The
limited available data suggested that economic activity in the major
foreign industrial countries picked up in early 1994 after a mixed
performance in the fourth quarter of 1993.
Producer prices of finished goods were boosted in February by
a surge in energy prices, especially for gasoline and heating oil,
that more than offset a further decline in food prices. Excluding the
food and energy components, producer prices edged higher in February:
for the twelve months ended in February, producer prices increased by
a significantly smaller amount than in the twelve-month period ended
in February 1993. At the consumer level, higher energy prices in
February were offset by lower food prices. For items other than food
and energy, consumer prices also rose less over the twelve months
ended in February than in the previous twelve months. Average hourly
earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers increased more slowly
in February, but for the twelve months ended in February, the advance
was about the same as that recorded for the previous twelve months.
At its meeting on February 3-4, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for a slight increase in the degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting
period. The directive stated that in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The
reserve conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with moderate growth of M2 and M3 over the first half of
1994.
Immediately following the February meeting, Chairman
Greenspan announced the Committee's decision, and open market
operations were directed toward implementing the slightly less
accommodative degree of reserve pressures sought by the Committee.
The federal funds rate increased by 1/4 percentage point and then
remained close to 3-1/4 percent over the intermeeting period, while
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged a little less than
anticipated.
Most other market interest rates rose considerably more than
the federal funds rate in frequently volatile markets. Market
participants generally had anticipated a tightening of monetary
policy, but the Committee's action apparently came a little sooner
than had been expected. Strong fourth-quarter economic data and
evidence of solid growth in early 1994 were seen as suggesting greater
credit demands and the need for higher interest rates in the future to
contain inflation. Heightened trade tensions and unsettled market
conditions abroad also contributed to market concerns. In these
circumstances, intermediate- and longer-term interest rates increased
by appreciably more than short-term money market rates. Major indexes
of stock prices had fallen on balance since early February in
sometimes volatile trading.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies initially rose following the tightening of monetary
policy on February 4. The dollar depreciated over the balance of the
intermeeting period, however, despite higher U.S. interest rates and
the release of data indicating generally strong U.S. economic
activity. The dollar declined against both the Japanese yen and the
German mark, trade frictions between the United States and Japan and
disappointment over the pace of monetary easing in Germany appeared to
be contributing factors in the depreciation of the dollar. Bond
yields in all the major foreign industrial countries rose on average
by almost as much as yields on comparable U.S. bonds.
M2 declined somewhat and M3 was down sharply in February. A
substantial drop in mortgage refinancings since late 1993 that
depressed demand deposits, and to a lesser extent savings deposits, contributed to the weakness of M2 in February. M3 also was affected
by a precipitous decline in institution-only money funds as investors
reacted quickly following the monetary tightening to widening spreads
between returns on these funds and higher-yielding short-term
instruments. Data for early March pointed to some rebound in both
monetary aggregates, perhaps owing to portfolio readjustments that
involved sizable net redemptions of bond funds and apparently-weaker
inflows to stock funds. Total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at
a moderate rate in recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic expansion would slow from the very strong pace of the fourth
quarter but that the economy would advance in 1994 at a rate slightly
in excess of the growth of potential. Consumer spending, which had
tended for some time to outpace income growth, was projected to
increase at a rate more in line with disposable incomes; spending on
durable goods, in particular, was projected to slow markedly as stock-adjustment motives diminished and higher interest rates exerted some
restraint. Business fixed investment was expected to increase less
rapidly in 1994, reflecting the diminishing effect of the earlier
pickup in output growth and the slower growth of corporate cash flow.
Homebuilding activity was anticipated to continue at a relatively
brisk pace, spurred by the greater cash-flow affordability of housing
and the good prospects for continued growth in employment and incomes.
The restraint on output growth from federal spending cutbacks and weak
export demand was projected to diminish somewhat. In light of the
limited margins of slack in labor and product markets that were
expected to prevail over the forecast horizon, little further
reduction in the core rate of inflation was expected.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members referred to widespread indications of
appreciable momentum in the economic expansion and decreasing margins
of unemployed labor and other producer resources. While the members
continued to anticipate a marked slowing in economic growth from the
very rapid pace of the fourth quarter, some commented that despite
unusually severe winter weather in large parts of the country the
deceleration in the current quarter appeared to be less than they had
expected. The indications of continuing strength in aggregate demand
along with a still-accommodative monetary policy suggested a much
reduced risk that the economic expansion would stall. Indeed, members
continued to expect moderate economic growth, though perhaps for a
time at a rate somewhat above the economy's potential. The amount of
resources that could be mobilized readily to meet this demand was
subject to substantial uncertainty, but the degree of slack in the
economy clearly had diminished considerably in recent quarters to
relatively low levels and likely would shrink further. The immediate
outlook for inflation remained favorable: costs and prices were being
contained by moderate wage increases, continuing pressures for
productivity-enhancing investment, and competitive prices from abroad
where slack was still quite ample; and broad measures of money and
credit, though strengthening over the last half of 1993, remained
moderate by historical standards. Nevertheless, looking ahead,
members were concerned that, unless monetary policy were adjusted
further from its still-accommodative stance, pressures on resources
would intensify and inflation would pick up.
Members assessed the outlook for economic activity and prices
against the backdrop of sharp changes in bond and, to a lesser extent,
equity prices over the intermeeting period. Clearly, the tightening
of reserve conditions announced on February 4 had played a role in
market movements, but other factors had been at work as well. Members
variously stressed the possibility that the backup in interest rates
had reflected much stronger aggregate demand, added uncertainty about
the course of interest rates, influences from foreign exchange and
foreign capital markets, changes in trading strategies by wary
participants, and rising inflation expectations. On balance,
financial conditions were still seen as supportive of solid economic
expansion, and a number of members referred in particular to the more
accommodative lending policies of many depository institutions;
however, some commented on the risk, which they viewed as having a low
probability, that weakness and volatility in financial markets could
at some point have a significantly inhibiting effect on business and
consumer confidence and spending. To date, business sentiment was
described as quite positive in most parts of the country, and although
there were some exceptions--notably in California--members commented
on numerous indications of improving regional economies.
A number of members observed that they expected consumer
spending to be relatively well maintained, buttressed by considerable
strength in expenditures for motor vehicles and other consumer
durables. Reports on retail sales from various parts of the country
tended to support such assessments, and many contacts among retailers
were expressing optimism about the outlook for their sales. At the
same time, some members observed that a number of factors were likely
to limit the potential strength of consumer spending. They referred
in particular to the already low saving rate, relatively high consumer
indebtedness, and recent declines in the value of securities held by
households. More importantly, however, consumer confidence and
spending would continue to depend heavily on the outlook for further
growth in employment and incomes.
Business investment expenditures remained on a solid uptrend
as firms continued to focus on the need to control costs and improve
operating efficiencies in the face of vigorous competitive pressures.
Members also cited some examples of investment spending induced by
rising demands pressing against limitations in production capacity.
While business investment had tended to be concentrated in new, more
productive equipment, nonresidential construction also had
strengthened and anecdotal reports from numerous areas tended to
confirm more positive nationwide statistics. The rising levels of
nonresidential construction activity tended to be concentrated in
commercial and industrial facilities and public works projects; the
construction of office buildings continued to lag but this sector
appeared to have stabilized or perhaps improved marginally after a
long period of decline. More generally, currently positive business
attitudes augured well for further growth in overall business
investment, but on the negative side it was noted that further
turbulence in financial markets could erode confidence with adverse
implications for investment spending. Residential construction was
described as quite strong in numerous areas, although overall housing
construction had been held down thus far this year by severe winter
weather in numerous parts of the country. Shortages of skilled
construction workers and building materials were reported in many
areas.
Despite generally rising final demands, business firms were
continuing to maintain lean inventory positions in their ongoing
efforts to hold down costs. Nonetheless, with production levels in
many industries approaching or reaching full capacity utilization,
prices of some materials and other business purchases coming under
increasing pressure, and delivery lead times tending to lengthen at
least in some industries, efforts to build inventories could be
expected to materialize and in one view the potential for such a
development represented a key upside risk from current forecasts. In
this connection, some members referred to scattered indications of
efforts to increase inventories, notably of steel products.
Manufacturers of motor vehicles also were in the process of rebuilding
depleted inventories, though the currently stimulative impact of such
rebuilding on overall production was likely to be reversed when motor
vehicle stocks reached desired levels in the months ahead.
The foreign trade sector was expected to remain a negative
factor in the economic outlook. However, the members anticipated some
improvement in the economies of major foreign industrial nations
which, together with some moderation in the growth of domestic final
demands, was likely to slow the decline in real net exports. A few
members cited growing indications that last year's NAFTA legislation
would have quite positive effects on U.S. foreign trade, though those
effects were still largely in the future.
In the discussion of the outlook for prices and wages, many
of the members expressed concern about the potential for a pickup in
inflation if, as they anticipated, margins of unemployed resources
narrowed further or disappeared. The members acknowledged that broad
measures of prices relating to final purchases and of wages currently
did not suggest any increase in inflation. Indeed, in the view of at
least some members, those measures still suggested on balance that the
inflation trend had retained a downward tilt thus far. In this
connection, some commented that the overall performance of the broad
measures had been somewhat better in recent months than they had
anticipated, especially given the very rapid expansion of the economy
over the closing months of 1993 and the less than expected moderation
thus far this year. Developments that had been exerting a favorable
effect on prices included above-trend growth in productivity,
relatively low prices in world oil markets, and strong competition in
many markets from both domestic and foreign firms. Moreover, the
strong rise in credit usage that often had accompanied intensified
inflation pressures in the past had yet to materialize. To date, the
pickup in price increases had been uneven and had tended to be
concentrated in some regions or industries and in the early stages of
the production process, and a number of members reported that they saw
little change in inflation trends in their areas. Nonetheless,
warning signs had emerged of the prospect of greater inflation, though
perhaps not over the nearer term. These included increases in a wide
range of commodity prices and anecdotal reports from various parts of
the country suggesting a further rise in the number of business firms
that were facing somewhat higher prices of materials and other
purchases and in turn were able, often for the first time in recent
years, to raise their selling prices. Price and wage pressures
appeared to be especially pronounced in the construction industry,
where capacity constraints had been encountered in many localities.
Members also referred to the potential for higher prices in the food
and energy sectors; low crop carryovers for some grains made food
prices vulnerable to unfavorable growing conditions, should they
materialize; oil prices currently were at relative lows but were
likely to come under some upward pressures as world economic growth
accelerated and if political developments led to disruptions in world
supplies. More fundamentally, the relatively robust economic
expansion over the second half of 1993 and the further advance in
early 1994 appeared in the view of many members to have appreciably
diminished the gap between actual and potential GDP and to have
reduced the rate of unemployment to a level that could well be not far
from the natural rate. If this assessment proved to be correct,
further economic expansion at a pace above the economy's potential
would bring more industries and the economy more generally to capacity
production levels before very long and could well-generate growing
inflation thereafter.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members supported a further move toward a less
accommodative policy stance. An initial move in that direction had
been made in early February, but the members still viewed monetary
policy as too stimulative. In this regard, members cited the very low
inflation-adjusted interest rates in short-term debt markets as an
indicator of excessive policy accommodation, and one member also
referred to the rapid growth in reserves and narrow measures of money
over an extended period. While a quite accommodative policy stance
had been entirely appropriate earlier in the economic recovery, when
constraints such as the widespread rebuilding of balance sheets and
business restructuring activities were strongly inhibiting the
expansionary forces in the economy, those constraints had greatly
diminished and the expansion clearly had gained considerable momentum.
In the circumstances, maintaining an accommodative monetary policy
could be expected before too long to foster growing pressures on labor
and capital resources with a resulting pickup in inflation. While
actual inflation remained subdued and credit growth was still damped,
it was only a matter of time before the current monetary policy
induced a surge in credit extensions that could fuel an outbreak of
inflation.
In these circumstances, the members concluded that monetary
policy needed to move fairly quickly toward what might be characterized as a more neutral position. Such a policy posture could not be
defined with precision and it undoubtedly varied to some extent with
changing circumstances. Nonetheless, it provided a useful conceptual
approach to policy in current circumstances and could be identified as
a policy stance that sought to foster sustained noninflationary
expansion consistent with the economy's potential. The members
generally concluded that such a policy stance was still some distance
away, and the key issue facing the Committee was not whether but how
promptly the necessary policy adjustment should be completed. Whether
further tightening beyond that point would be needed later could not
be determined at this time but would depend on the potential emergence
of conditions pointing to an acceleration of inflation.
As had been the case at the February meeting, views differed
on how much further current monetary policy should be adjusted at this
meeting. Many members noted that money market interest rates would
have to rise by a relatively sizable amount from current levels, given
underlying economic conditions, but a majority indicated a preference
for another small move at this time. Many were concerned about a
possible overreaction in financial markets that had become quite
sensitive and volatile since early February. A few also placed some
emphasis on their expectations of a considerable slowdown in the rate
of economic growth and the possibility that the moderation of the
expansion might prove to be somewhat more pronounced than was
currently projected. In this view, a degree of caution was advisable
to permit an assessment of ongoing developments.
Members who preferred a more sizable policy adjustment, or
perhaps a small move through open market operations that was
associated with a rise in the discount rate, believed that the
increasing risks of greater inflation pointed to the need to move more
promptly and decisively away from a policy stance that had become
overly accommodative. A stronger policy action at this point would
serve to underscore the Committee's commitment to its price stability
objective and would help to counteract what some members interpreted
as a significant increase in inflationary expectations since earlier
in the year. A reduction in such expectations would over time have
beneficial implications for bond markets and the economy. In the view
of some members, continued market expectations of further actions to
tighten reserve conditions were themselves contributing to market
instability. Some members also commented that any policy choice
incurred the risk of proving to be wrong, but they viewed the greatest
risk at this juncture to be a policy that allowed inflationary
pressures to gather momentum. A policy decision that in hindsight led
to the implementation of too much restraint could be corrected more
readily and with less damage to the economy in this view.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting
adjustments to the degree of reserve pressure, a majority of the
members indicated a preference for retaining a symmetric directive.
While the probability of an easing action during this period was
deemed to be very low, the members also did not see as very likely any
firming over the intermeeting period beyond that to be implemented
after today's meeting. The Committee had embarked on a course of
moving away from an accommodative stance toward one that was more
neutral. The timing of the actions to implement this policy was not
independent of the behavior of the economy, of course, but it was not
as dependent on the nuances of incoming data as policy might be at
other times when the course of policy was less clear. Symmetry did
not rule out an intermeeting adjustment of policy by the Chairman on
behalf of the Committee, as had been done with some frequency in the
past when that seemed warranted by intermeeting developments. Members
who favored an asymmetric directive observed that such a directive
seemed more consistent with the current thrust of monetary policy
toward less accommodation and the related need to respond promptly to
indications of accelerating inflation. These members indicated,
however, that they could support a symmetric directive that was
associated with the prospect of intermeeting consultations.
At the conclusion of the Committee's policy discussion, all
but two of the members indicated that they could accept a directive
that called for a slight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that did not include a presumption about the likely
direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
According to a staff analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at
this meeting would be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3
over the first half of 1994.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity has expanded appreciably further
in the early months of 1994. Severe weather and
changes in statistical methodology distorted movements
in official labor market data in January and February,
but it appears that employment increased somewhat on
balance over the two months and that unemployment fell.
Industrial production also increased substantially over
this period after a sharp rise in the fourth quarter.
Consumer spending and housing activity apparently have
been held down to some extent by adverse weather in
January and February: retail sales were little changed
on balance over the two months and housing starts fell
considerably. Trends in contracts and orders point to
a sizable increase in business fixed investment but at
a rate well below that for the fourth quarter of 1993.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
in January was slightly smaller than the average in the
fourth quarter. Increases in broad indexes of consumer
and producer prices have remained moderate in recent
months despite a surge in energy prices.
Most market interest rates have risen considerably
since the Committee meeting on February 3-4, 1994. In
foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of
the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies
depreciated over the intermeeting period.
M2 declined somewhat and M3 was down sharply in
February, but data for early March point to some
rebound in both aggregates. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has expanded at a moderate rate in recent
months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in February established ranges for growth of M2
and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994. The Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases
could persist during the year and that money growth
within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the
first half of 1994.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Forrestal, Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey,
Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Broaddus,
and Jordan.
Messrs. Broaddus and Jordan dissented because they preferred
a stronger move toward a more neutral policy stance. In their view,
the recent sharp increases in longer-term interest rates indicated
clearly that inflationary expectations were rising and that the
principal policy risk had become one of remaining accommodative for
too long a period. In this environment, they believed that a more
aggressive move would underscore the Committee's commitment to
fostering sustainable longer-term growth and reduce the risk that a
highly restrictive policy might be required at a later date to contain
inflation.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the desirability
of making an immediate announcement of today's policy decision. All
the members favored prompt disclosure in principle, but some expressed
reservations about announcing today's decision immediately after the
meeting. These members preferred to consider a decision on
announcements of policy actions in the context of a broad range of
disclosure issues, some of which had yet to be fully explored. Some
stressed that they remained concerned about the inhibiting effects of
some types of disclosures on the Committee's deliberations, and one
member emphasized that the Committee also needed to consider the
implications of immediate announcements of changes in open market
policy for the role of the discount rate. Several members commented
that announcing a decision reached at this meeting, because it would
come after a similar announcement following the most recent meeting in
early February, would in effect set a precedent that would tend to
limit the Committee's future options. A majority of the members
concluded, however, that while the Committee was not making a formal, binding decision on this issue at this meeting, the Chairman would be
authorized to release a short press statement regarding today's policy
decision. A useful purpose would be served in reducing or eliminating
potential misinterpretation of the Committee's policy decision and the
related risk of overreactions in financial markets at a time of
considerable uncertainty and volatility in those markets. The news of
the Committee's action would be conveyed unambiguously to the entire
public at once and not filtered through the financial markets'
interpretation of open market operations. Moreover, the Committee
would retain the option of specifying the exact contents and timing of
future policy announcements, including intermeeting policy actions.
Most of the members concluded that the advantages to the public of
prompt release today outweighed the potential disadvantages.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, May 17. 1994. This meeting adjourned at 2:05 p.m.
At a telephone conference held on March 24, 1994, the
Committee approved a temporary increase, from $700 million to $3.0
billion, in the Federal Reserve System's reciprocal currency ("swap")
arrangement with the Bank of Mexico. Concurrently, the U.S. Treasury
announced a $3 billion swap arrangement between the U.S. Exchange
Stabilization Fund and the Bank of Mexico and the Mexican Ministry of
Finance. The System's action was effective immediately and. subject
to certain conditions, it authorized the Bank of Mexico to draw on the
enlarged arrangement until April 29, 1994, with full repayment of any
drawings to be made by July 29, 1994.
A permanent increase in the System's swap arrangement with
the Bank of Mexico had been discussed at the Committee's recent
meeting on March 22, and it had been contemplated at that meeting that
the Committee would vote on such an increase during April in the
context of the establishment of a consultative mechanism involving the
finance ministries and central banks of Canada, Mexico, and the United
States. However, the assassination of a major candidate for the
presidency of Mexico on the evening of March 23 had prompted the
closing of Mexican financial markets on March 24 and had given rise to
concerns regarding possible financial market disorder in reaction to
unfolding political developments when those markets reopened. Against
this background, the Committee decided to join the U.S. Treasury in an
action that would help confirm continued U.S. support for Mexico's
economic policies at a potentially critical time for Mexican financial
markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Vote against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
Effective April 26, 1994, the Committee by notation vote
approved a recommendation by Chairman Greenspan to establish an
enlarged swap arrangement of $3 billion on a permanent basis. As is
the case for all swap arrangements, this arrangement is subject to
periodic annual review after an initial maturity date of December 15,
1995. Simultaneously, the maturity date of the System's swap facility
with the Bank of Canada was extended by one year to December 15, 1995.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley, LaWare,
Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Vote against this action: Mr. Broaddus.
The enlarged foreign exchange swap arrangement with the Bank
of Mexico constituted part of a new trilateral foreign exchange swap
facility established in connection with the newly formed consultative
group called the North American Financial Group and comprised of the
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of Canada, Mexico, and
the United States. The purpose of this standing facility is to expand
the pool of potential resources available to the monetary authorities
of each country to maintain orderly exchange markets. Its
establishment at this time was deemed desirable in light of the
outlook for expanding and increasingly interdependent economic
relationships among the three economies following the successful
conclusion of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The components of the trilateral facility include (1) swap
agreements between the United States and Mexico for up to $6.0
billion, with the Treasury and the Federal Reserve each participating
up to $3.0 billion; (2) an expansion of the swap agreement between the
Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico to CAN$1.0 billion; and (3) a
reaffirmation of the existing swap agreement between the Bank of
Canada and the Federal Reserve in the amount of $2.0 billion, with the
above-noted maturity extension.
Mr. Broaddus dissented because he was concerned about the
appropriateness of the System's involvement in this type of foreign
currency operation. In his view, the System's swap network raised a
number of broad issues that he felt the Committee needed to review at
some point. Accordingly, he would not favor increasing any existing
swap arrangement until such a review had taken place.
At a telephone conference on April 18, Committee members
reviewed economic and financial developments since the March meeting
and discussed the desirability of taking further action to move policy
away from its still accommodative stance. Broad indicators of
economic activity, supported by widespread anecdotal evidence, pointed
to considerable momentum in economic activity and further reductions
in already limited margins of unutilized labor and other production
resources. In financial markets, sharp declines in bond and stock
prices suggested that speculative excesses had been reduced, and
ongoing portfolio realignments probably were shifting long-term
financial assets to firmer hands. As a result, financial markets now
appeared to be less likely to overreact to adverse developments or to
policy actions. In the circumstances, the members supported the
Chairman's decision to reduce the degree of accommodation in reserve
markets slightly further at this time rather than to await the next
regularly scheduled meeting in mid-May. Some members expressed the
view that an increase in the discount rate would provide a desirable
supplement to this policy action.
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: August 31, 2010