FRB: FOMC Minutes--May 17, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of
May 17, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 17, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, and Melzer, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Ms. Minehan, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Goodfriend, Lindsey, Promisel, Simpson,
Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis,
Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Judd and Ms. White, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco and New York
respectively
Messrs. Altig and Coughlin, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland
and St. Louis respectively
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on March 22, 1994, were approved.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets and on System open market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period March 22, 1994, through May 16,
1994. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period March 22, 1994, through May 16, 1994. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity had expanded substantially on balance thus far in
1994. Favorable business expectations and buoyant consumer sentiment
in the context of stronger gains in employment appeared to have
sustained strong growth in domestic final demand. Broad measures of
inflation had remained subdued and labor cost increases had been
moderate, though prices of industrial materials had continued to rise.
Nonfarm payroll employment increased sharply in March and
April, in part reflecting a rebound in industries affected by earlier
severe winter weather; for the first four months of the year, the
average monthly rise exceeded the improved pace of the fourth quarter.
Further large advances in employment in the March-April period were
recorded in the services sector, notably at personnel supply services
firms; hiring in construction was strong after earlier weather-related
losses; and the number of jobs in manufacturing continued to expand,
although at a somewhat slower pace than in previous months. The
civilian unemployment rate registered another slight decline in April,
to 6.4 percent, and the average workweek of production or
nonsupervisory workers remained at an unusually high level.
Industrial production was up appreciably further in April,
with increases widespread across sectors. The pace of motor vehicle
assemblies slowed, but much of the indicated slowdown reflected the
effects of seasonal adjustment, which called for increases at a time
when manufacturing operations already were at levels close to
capacity. Output of public utilities fell again, as electricity
generation dropped with the return to less severe weather patterns.
Rates of industrial capacity utilization had risen rapidly in recent
months and were at very high levels in many industries--especially in
motor vehicles, petroleum refining, lumber, and primary metals.
Retail sales were estimated to have fallen in April after two
months of very large increases. Despite the April decline, which was
widespread by type of retail outlet, outlays were considerably above
the first-quarter average. Sales of new and existing homes posted
significant gains in March although they remained below their fourth-quarter averages. Housing starts decreased slightly in April but were
well above the depressed winter pace. The third consecutive monthly
gain in multifamily starts was more than offset by a decline in
single-family starts.
Real business fixed investment continued to increase rapidly
in the first quarter, but at a less robust pace than in the fourth
quarter of 1993. Outlays for producers durable equipment posted
another sizable advance, spending for computing equipment surged
again, and purchases of most other types of equipment also continued
to trend up. Moreover, business demand for automobiles and trucks
remained strong. Outlays for nonresidential structures declined
sharply in the first quarter, although construction activity showed
some recovery in March after the disruptions associated with severe
weather during January and February.
Business inventories declined in March, reversing part of the
large run-up in stocks that had occurred in the first two months of
the year. For the first quarter as a whole, inventories rose at a
slightly slower pace than in the second half of last year. In
manufacturing, the accumulation in the first quarter retraced much of
the drawdown that had taken place in previous months; the inventory-to-shipments ratio, already at a low level, edged still lower.
Wholesale inventories were down on balance over the first quarter,
with a large March decline more than retracing increases earlier in
the year; the ratio of inventories to sales was well below the range
prevailing over the last several years. Retail inventories expanded
modestly in the first quarter, and the inventory-to-sales ratio fell
slightly.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services was
larger on average in January and February than it had been in the
fourth quarter. The value of exports in the January-February period
was sharply below the unusually strong level in the fourth quarter but
was slightly higher than the levels recorded in the first three
quarters of 1993. Exports were down in virtually all major trade
categories; one important exception was semiconductors, for which
exports continued to trend higher. Imports in the two-month period
fell by less than exports; nearly all of the decline reflected reduced
oil imports. Available indicators for the first quarter pointed to
recovery in economic activity at a moderate pace on average in the
major foreign industrial countries. Signs of recovery ranged from
quite tentative in Japan to relatively well-established in the United
Kingdom and Canada.
Indexes of consumer and producer prices had increased
slightly thus far in 1994. In April, consumer prices posted their
smallest rise since January; food prices were up a bit further, but
energy prices retraced their March run-up. Excluding the food and
energy components of the index, consumer prices edged up in April, and
over the twelve months ending in April these prices increased less
than they had over the previous twelve months. Producer prices of
finished goods declined a little in April as prices of finished foods
and energy moved down; for items other than food and energy, prices
were up slightly in April and for the twelve months ending in April.
At earlier stages of processing, the index of producer prices of crude
materials other than food and energy was substantially above its year-ago level, despite a small drop in April. At the intermediate stage,
the prices of some important construction materials had increased
sharply although, overall, prices of nonfood, non-energy goods had
risen only modestly over the past twelve months.
Increases in labor costs continued to moderate in early 1994.
The employment cost index for private industry workers rose more
slowly in the first quarter of 1994 than in any quarter of 1993. The
slowdown reflected more moderate growth in both wages and salaries and
benefit costs. Hourly compensation increased at a slightly slower
pace over the twelve months ending in March 1994 than over the
previous year. In April, average hourly earnings of production or
nonsupervisory workers on nonfarm payrolls increased moderately after
having changed little over February and March.
At its meeting on March 22, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for a slight increase in the degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting
period. The directive stated that in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The
reserve conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with moderate growth of M2 and M3 over the first half of
1994.
Immediately after the meeting, open market operations were
directed toward implementing the slightly less accommodative degree of
reserve pressure sought by the Committee. Subsequently, on April 18,
against the background of incoming data suggesting considerable
momentum and diminishing slack in the economy and of indications that
financial markets were less likely to be destabilized by a further
policy action, the degree of accommodation in reserve pressures was
reduced a little further. The federal funds rate rose 1/4 percentage
point, to 3-1/2 percent, after the initial policy action; following
the second policy move, the funds rate went up another 1/4 percentage
point and generally remained near 3-3/4 percent. Over the
intermeeting period, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged
slightly above anticipated levels.
Most market interest rates increased by more than the federal
funds rate over the period since the March meeting, with the largest
increases occurring at intermediate maturities. Weakness in the
dollar as well as the release of data suggesting considerable vigor in
economic activity appeared to have contributed to the upward pressure
on market rates. The bank prime rate was raised 3/4 percentage point,
to 6-3/4 percent, while major indexes of stock prices fell
substantially.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined somewhat further
on balance over the intermeeting period. The dollar's depreciation
occurred despite the implementation of less accommodative policy
actions in the United States and monetary easing moves in several key
foreign countries. Market concerns about political developments in
Japan as well as a worsened outlook for progress toward more open
trading relationships and for a more stimulative fiscal policy in that
country contributed to downward pressure on the dollar. Against the
backdrop of a falling dollar, U.S. authorities conducted intervention
operations on April 29 and again on May 4. The latter operations were
coupled with a statement by Treasury Secretary Bentsen indicating that
intervention was being undertaken in response to recent movements in
exchange markets that had gone beyond what could be justified by
economic fundamentals and was being conducted in concert with
operations by other major countries. Subsequent to these actions, the
dollar retraced part of its earlier decline.
Growth of M2 and M3 turned up, on balance, in March and
April despite the rising short-term opportunity costs of holding
deposits. The strengthening of these aggregates seemed to be related
to a reassessment by households of the relative attractiveness of
investing in capital market instruments; capital losses sparked
substantial net redemptions at bond mutual funds over March and April
that were accompanied by a surge in flows to retail money market funds
and slower runoffs of small time deposits. For the year through
April, M2 expanded at a rate somewhat below the middle of its range
for 1994, and M3 at a pace somewhat above the lower end of its range.
Total domestic nonfinancial debt continued to expand at a moderate
rate over recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic activity, after rebounding from the disruptions caused by
adverse weather conditions earlier in the year, would expand in the
second half of 1994 at a rate close to the growth of the economy's
potential. Consumer spending, which had outpaced gains in household
income for some time, was projected to slow to a growth rate more in
line with the expansion of income; with pent-up demands apparently
reduced and somewhat higher interest rates exerting a damping effect,
much of the slowing was expected to be centered on outlays for durable
goods. Business fixed investment would be restrained by the slower
growth of business output and the associated moderation of corporate
cash flows but would continue to advance at a faster rate than overall
economic activity. Homebuilding was projected to remain at a pace
that was relatively robust compared with the rate of recent years,
though a bit below that of the fourth quarter. The restraint on
output growth from federal spending cutbacks and weak export demand
was expected to diminish somewhat. In light of limited margins of
slack in labor and product markets over the forecast horizon, little
or no further reduction in the core rate of inflation was anticipated.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
developments, members commented on widespread indications, both
statistical and anecdotal, of considerable momentum in the economic
expansion. Business activity seemed to be rebounding smartly from the
disruptive effects of unusually severe winter weather, and it appeared
that the expansion over the first half of the year was likely to be a
little stronger than had been expected at the time of the March
meeting. A deceleration in activity still seemed to be in train for
the second half, but the extent of such a slowing was an important
source of uncertainty in the outlook. The members continued to see
moderate growth at a rate in line with or slightly above the economy's
potential as the most likely prospect, but the overall momentum of the
expansion and the still accommodative stance of monetary policy
suggested that there was an appreciable risk of faster growth for a
period, with consequent implications for greater pressures on
resources. At the same time, the members saw relatively few signs of
the kinds of imbalances that would pose a significant downside
potential for the economy, although some cautioned that the rise in
long-term interest rates, recently weaker data on production and
sales, and continuing anxiety about job security in an environment of
corporate restructuring contributed elements of fragility to what was
otherwise a healthy outlook. The near-term prospects for inflation
were favorable. Wage and price trends generally remained moderate;
the persisting high rate of business investment bode well for further
enhancements of productivity; and competitive pressures, including
those from imported goods, were restraining efforts by firms to raise
prices. The members were concerned, however, that in an environment
in which slack in the economy already had been reduced to a fairly low
level and could decline further in the quarters ahead, inflation could
begin to rise unless monetary policy were adjusted further from its
accommodative stance.
In their comments about developments across the nation,
members took note of the considerable strength in economic conditions
in many parts of the country. However, they also recognized that some
parts of the nation were experiencing relatively subdued growth and
that economic activity remained depressed in other areas such as
Southern California and Hawaii. The strong forward momentum in the
economy was most clearly evident in interest-sensitive sectors,
including motor vehicles, other durable goods, and housing. The rise
in interest rates over the course of recent months was cited by
business contacts as a potential source of restraint on interest-sensitive expenditures, but thus far relatively few contacts had
reported actual examples of adverse interest-rate effects on spending.
While higher rates would constrain aggregate demand going forward,
their effects probably would be offset in part by more aggressive
lending practices at banks and other institutions. At the same time,
reports of industries that were operating at or near capacity limits
were becoming more numerous, and capacity constraints were said to be
limiting some sales.
With regard to the outlook for key sectors of the economy,
consumer expenditures were viewed by many members as likely to be well
maintained, particularly for motor vehicles and other consumer
durables. Reports from various parts of the country indicated that
sales had tended in many areas to exceed retailers' expectations by a
considerable margin in recent months. Some members noted, however,
that sales had been less ebullient since late winter and cited factors
that might work to restrain somewhat the growth of consumer spending.
These included high and rising debt levels, declines in household
wealth owing to the drop in stock and bond prices, and the effects on
consumer confidence of ongoing workforce reductions associated with
business restructuring. Higher interest rates also might limit the
pace at which pent-up demands would continue to be satisfied. On
balance, in the view of a number of members, growth in consumer
spending seemed likely to moderate to a pace close to the growth in
incomes.
Members expected business fixed investment to continue to
expand at a pace substantially above that of the economy as a whole.
With production straining capacity limits in a number of industries
and firms striving for cost savings and productivity improvements to
maintain their competitiveness, real outlays for producers' durable
equipment were likely to stay on a strong upward trend despite an
anticipated deceleration in business output and the recently increased
cost of external capital associated with higher interest rates and
lower equity prices. It was noted in this connection that order books
at producers of capital equipment had grown considerably.
Nonresidential construction appeared to be rebounding from the
disruptive effects of unusually severe winter weather conditions;
however, the pattern of construction activity across the nation was
mixed, with some areas of the country displaying considerable strength
in activity and other areas still depressed. The construction of
office buildings for the most part remained at very low levels, but
anecdotal reports indicated that markets for office space, especially
those that had been hard hit in recent years, seemed to be improving
considerably in some locales. Business inventories remained quite
lean by historical standards, and some reports suggested that efforts
to augment stocks had been negated by strong sales. With survey
reports indicating that order backlogs had grown and lead times on
materials deliveries had lengthened, the possibility was increasing
that desired inventory ratios might be adjusted upward and some pickup
in inventory investment might get under way, especially in
manufacturing where stocks-to-sales ratios recently had fallen to new
lows.
Residential construction was indicated to be robust across
much of the country, with activity picking up rapidly in the aftermath
of the unusually severe winter. The affordability of housing remained
high by historical standards, and the appeal of home ownership had
been enhanced somewhat by the apparent firming of house prices over
the past year. In these circumstances, housing activity had been well
sustained, although there were some indications that the higher
mortgage rates now prevailing had begun to damp residential
investment.
The foreign trade sector was expected to continue to exert
some drag on economic growth, but the members saw this as likely to
lessen as an anticipated gradual pickup in economic activity among key
trading partners bolstered demand for U.S. exports while imports were
restrained by a projected moderation in the growth of U.S. domestic
demand. In the view of one member, the export sector would tend to
sustain and perhaps become an important stimulus to growth in the
United States as earlier declines in the dollar, taken in conjunction
with technological improvements and higher product quality, enhanced
the competitiveness of U.S. exports.
In their discussion of the outlook for prices and wages, the
members noted that broad measures of inflation remained subdued and
increases in labor costs had been moderate. Nevertheless, they
continued to be concerned that inflation could begin to rise if growth
in excess of potential were to persist and margins of unutilized
production resources were to shrink further, or even disappear.
Production already had reached capacity limits in a number of
industries, including motor vehicles and steel, and prices of some raw
materials and intermediate goods had risen substantially over the past
year. Ongoing efforts to expand production capacity through
productivity-enhancing investment and the hiring of additional workers
were likely to be of some help in meeting growing demands, but an
increasing number of contacts were reporting that business firms were
taking advantage of opportunities to adjust prices upward. There also
were indications of shortages of qualified workers in some labor
markets or industries, but to date there were only limited signs of
upward wage pressures and these did not seem to signal a near-term
emergence of general upward cost pressures on prices. Indeed, even
with sales strong, many business contacts were reporting that intense
competition, in part from imports, was curbing or negating efforts to
raise prices. Firms were continuing to look primarily to improvements
in productivity and quality to bolster their profit margins, although
there also were reports that price discounting was lessening and that
sales promotions were becoming less frequent. Price and wage
pressures were most clearly evident and widespread in the construction
industry, where resource constraints appeared to be most pronounced.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the
period until the meeting in early July, the members favored prompt
further action to remove much of the remaining accommodation in the
stance of monetary policy, at least as measured by real short-term
interest rates. Many members commented that the expansion was on a
solid and self-sustaining basis and appeared to have more underlying
strength than they had foreseen earlier. The stimulative effects of
an expansionary monetary policy had become increasingly apparent--especially in business purchases of capital equipment and consumer
spending on housing, motor vehicles, and other consumer durables. At
the same time, the constraints on economic expansion that had been
associated with business restructuring activities, widespread efforts
to strengthen balance sheets, and other retarding forces had
diminished considerably. The financial health of the banking system
was greatly improved, and banking institutions had evidenced a growing
willingness to make new loans. Moreover, the demand for bank loans,
which had been sluggish for several years, now appeared to be on the
rise. While a series of small steps earlier this year had already
reduced the degree of accommodation in monetary policy and inflation
was subdued for the time being, the members were concerned that
continued policy accommodation could be expected to lead before long
to growing pressures on production resources and to a fresh outbreak
of inflation.
In the circumstances, all the members agreed that a further
tightening action was needed at this point; and, in order to better
assure that the remaining degree of policy accommodation had been
largely removed, the adjustment should fully reflect the 1/2
percentage point increase in the discount rate that the Board of
Governors was expected to approve later in the day. The actions taken
earlier in the year had been modest in size because of concerns that
more aggressive steps might generate substantial uncertainty and undue
disruptions in financial markets, with adverse consequences for the
economy. Even though financial markets remained volatile, speculative
sentiment and holdings seemed to have been reduced to a marked extent,
and financial markets appeared to be in a much better position to
absorb needed policy adjustments. Accordingly, a stronger action
probably would not produce an unduly adverse market response and could
well have a settling effect on the markets. A number of members
cautioned that the Committee could not be sure that today's policy
actions, along with those implemented earlier this year, had produced
a policy stance that would foster economic growth at a sustainable,
non-inflationary pace. Thus, the Committee would have to remain alert
to economic and financial developments that might signal the need for
further tightening.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting
adjustments to the degree of reserve pressure, all but one of the
members indicated a preference for retaining a symmetric directive.
Symmetry would be consistent with a judgment that further policy
adjustment likely would not be needed during the intermeeting period
ahead and, in particular, that additional tightening would not be
triggered unless inflation pressures greater than those currently
anticipated were to emerge. The adoption of a symmetric directive
would not preclude an intermeeting consultation and possible
adjustment by the Chairman on behalf of the Committee if such were
warranted by intermeeting developments. One member expressed a
preference for an asymmetric directive. In his view, a symmetric
directive might be mistakenly interpreted both in the United States
and abroad as a signal that the Committee believed that policy
neutrality definitely had been achieved and that there was no need to
allow for the possibility of further tightening.
At the conclusion of the Committee's policy discussion, all
the members indicated they could support a directive that called for
increasing somewhat the degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase in the discount rate, and that
did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustment to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. According to a staff
analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting would be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity has expanded substantially on
balance thus far in 1994. Nonfarm payroll employment
increased sharply in March and April, in part
reflecting a rebound in sectors affected by severe
winter weather; the civilian unemployment rate fell
slightly further in April, to 6.4 percent. Industrial
production was up appreciably in April after a strong
rise over the previous two quarters. Advance data on
retail sales indicate a decline in April, after very
large increases in February and March. Housing starts
fell slightly in April but remained well above the
depressed winter pace. Orders for nondefense capital
goods point to a continued strong uptrend in spending
on business equipment, while nonresidential building
has shown some recovery after severe weather disrupted
construction during January and February. The nominal
deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services widened on
average in January and February from the fourth-quarter
rate. Increases in broad indexes of consumer and
producer prices remained moderate through April, though
prices of industrial materials continued to rise.
Market interest rates have posted large additional
increases since the Committee meeting on March 22,
1994. In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies declined somewhat further on balance over
the intermeeting period.
Growth of M2 and M3 picked up on average in March
and April; for the year through April, M2 expanded at a
rate somewhat below the middle of its range for 1994
and M3 at a pace somewhat above the bottom of its
range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has expanded
at a moderate rate in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in February established ranges for growth of M2
and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994. The Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases
could persist during the year and that money growth
within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to increase somewhat the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase in the discount
rate. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan, Kelley,
LaWare, Lindsey, Parry, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday-Wednesday, July 5-6, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 12:45 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007