FRB: FOMC Minutes--August 16, 1994
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of August 16, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 16, 1994, at 9:00  a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Conrad, Hoenig, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lindsey, Promisel,
Siegman, Simpson, Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Bennett, Davis, Dewald, Rosenblum, and
Vander Wilt, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York, Kansas City,
St. Louis, Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Messrs. McNees, Meyer, and Sniderman, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
Philadelphia, and Cleveland respectively
Ms. Meulendyke, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Secretary's Note:
Advice had been received that Janet L. Yellen had
executed her oath of office as member of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Advice also had been received of the election of
Cathy E. Minehan by the boards of directors of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and Richmond as
alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee for the
period ending December 31, 1994, and that she had executed
her oath of office; and of the election of William C. Conrad
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Cleveland and Chicago as alternate member of the Federal Open
Market Committee for the period ending with the appointment
of a president for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or
December 31, 1994, whichever comes first, and that he had
executed his oath of office.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on July 5-6, 1994, were approved.
The Manager for Foreign Operations reported on developments
in foreign exchange markets during the period since the July meeting.
There were no System open market transactions in foreign currencies
during this period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager for Domestic Operations reported on developments
in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions
in government securities and federal agency obligations during the
period July 6, 1994, through August 15, 1994. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
pace of economic expansion, though still substantial, might have
slowed somewhat recently. Consumer spending continued to post
moderate gains, supported by rising labor income and favorable
sentiment. Business outlays for plant and equipment remained on a
steep uptrend, but higher interest rates seemed to be having some
restraining effect on homebuilding activity. Resource utilization was
at elevated levels, with factories operating at relatively high rates
and labor markets evidencing very low levels of slack. Increases in
broad indexes of consumer and producer prices had remained moderate in
recent months, apart from the effects of short-run swings in the
volatile food and energy components.
Nonfarm payroll employment continued to advance at a robust
pace in July. Hiring in the services industries remained strong, with
personnel supply agencies posting another sizable increase. Jobs also
were up substantially in retail trade and construction. By contrast,
employment in manufacturing was held down by strike activity. The
civilian unemployment rate edged up to 6.1 percent in July, little
changed from the average for the second quarter.
Industrial production rose moderately in July after a sizable
gain in June; a decline in electricity generation from its unusually
high weather-related level in June damped the July advance.
Manufacturing output was up considerably in July, despite a drop in
the production of motor vehicles and parts; outside of motor vehicles,
increases were widespread, with a very large rise recorded in the
output of durable consumer goods. The overall rate of capacity
utilization in manufacturing remained at a high level, with most major
industry groups operating at or near capacity.
Growth in consumer spending had slowed in recent months,
owing in part to constraints on the supply of motor vehicles. Nominal
retail sales edged lower in July after expanding at a slightly reduced
pace in the second quarter. Sales at general merchandise and
furniture and appliance stores increased further in July, while
purchases at apparel outlets were down after large June increases.
Sales at automotive dealerships fell appreciably in July after edging
lower in the second quarter; these sales declines apparently resulted
in part from the inability of manufacturers to produce enough of the
most popular models. Housing starts in July retraced part of a large
June decline but remained below their elevated rate in the fourth
quarter of 1993.
Business fixed investment expanded in the second quarter at
about the same brisk pace as in the first quarter but well below the
rate recorded in 1993. In the second quarter, a strong recovery in
nonresidential construction activity from the weather-related decline
of the first quarter offset a marked slowing in business purchases of
durable equipment. Much of the slowdown in the growth of outlays for
equipment reflected a reduction in the pace of acquisition of office
and computing equipment. Other categories of durable equipment, with
the exception of aircraft and motor vehicles, continued to show solid
increases. Most indicators of business investment activity suggested
further large gains in coming months: Orders for nondefense capital
goods pointed to a continued strong expansion in spending on business
equipment, and permits for nonresidential construction had been rising
as well.
Business inventory investment slowed in June after a sharp
acceleration in April and May; for the second quarter as a whole,
inventories were up substantially but they appeared to have remained
broadly in line with sales. In manufacturing, recent inventory
buildups had been concentrated in a few industries where orders had
been particularly strong. For manufacturing as a whole, the ratio of
stocks to shipments declined from an already low level. At the
wholesale level, the accumulation of inventories in the second quarter
was largely in durable goods, which were in strong demand; the
inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector remained below the range that
has prevailed in recent years. A large part of the buildup of retail
inventories in the second quarter was in nondurable goods, especially
in stocks of general merchandise. For the retail sector as a whole,
the inventory-to-sales ratio at the end of June was near the high end
of the range observed in recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened slightly in May; for April and May combined, the deficit was
significantly larger than in the first quarter. Exports of goods and
services were about the same in May as in April, with increased
shipments of machinery and industrial supplies offset by reduced
exports of aircraft and gold. Imports of goods and services were
slightly higher in May than in April. Most of the increase was in
imports of oil, as a consequence of higher prices, and consumer goods.
The economies of all the major foreign industrial countries continued
to expand in the second quarter. Growth remained at a healthy pace in
the United Kingdom and Canada and appeared to have firmed in
continental Europe. In Japan, growth apparently slowed somewhat in
the second quarter.
Trends in broad measures of prices and labor costs had shown
no change thus far in 1994. In July, the overall index of consumer
prices rose at the same pace as in June, despite larger monthly
increases in the food and energy components of the index. The jump in
energy prices reflected the effects of the earlier run-up in crude oil
prices. For the twelve months ended in July, both the overall index
and the index excluding food and energy rose by about the same amounts
as during the preceding twelve-month period. At the producer level,
prices of finished goods were up significantly in July after no change
in June; large price increases were recorded for coffee and finished
energy goods. Prices of finished goods other than food and energy
were unchanged on balance over June and July and registered only a
small rise over the twelve months ended in July. At an earlier stage
of processing, producer prices of intermediate materials posted
another sizable gain in July. These prices had increased at a faster
rate thus far this year than in 1993, mirroring a similar pattern in
prices of nonfood, non-energy crude materials. The employment cost
index for private industry workers rose more rapidly in the second
quarter after a sharp slowing in the first quarter, with the
acceleration in compensation largely reflecting a pickup in wage and
salary growth. The increase in total compensation over the last four
quarters was little changed from the advance over the previous four-quarter period.
At its meeting on July 5-6, 1994, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions but that included a bias toward the possible
firming of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. The
directive stated that in the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint would be acceptable
or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth in M2 and
M3 over coming months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing rose over the period in
accommodation of the usual summer pickup in demands for seasonal
credit and averaged near anticipated levels. The federal funds rate
remained close to 4-1/4 percent.
Other market interest rates were unchanged to up slightly on
balance over the intermeeting period. Rates generally edged lower
during the early part of the period as incoming data were viewed by
market participants as being consistent with continued moderation in
final demands and a reduced need for any further monetary tightening
actions. In early August, however, interest rates began to erase
their previous declines, partly in response to the strong employment
report, which generated expectations that monetary policy might need
to be tightened substantially in the near term. Most major indexes of
equity prices were up on balance over the intermeeting period, with
second-quarter corporate profits generally better than had been
expected.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies declined early in the intermeeting period but later
recouped its losses and ended the period unchanged on balance. The
fluctuations in the dollar partly reflected evolving perceptions of
the degree to which U.S. authorities were concerned about further
weakness in the currency. Over the intermeeting period, the dollar
depreciated slightly against the mark but edged higher against the
yen.
Both M2 and M3 expanded in July after declining on average
over May and June. The growth of M2 in July owed in part to a sizable
increase in liquid deposits, but in light of a resumption of run-offs
at bond mutual funds it also may have reflected a renewed preference
by households for the protection of principal provided by money market
mutual funds. The strength in M2 showed through to M3, which also was
boosted by funds garnered from wholesale sources to finance a surge in
bank credit. For the year through July, M2 and M3 grew at rates
slightly above the bottom of their ranges for 1994. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt continued to expand at a moderate pace.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the economy was operating close to its long-run capacity and that
growth would trend lower over the next several quarters to a rate
generally in line with the increase in its potential. Under these
circumstances, trends in the core rate of inflation would not deviate
significantly from recent experience, but there was a risk that such
an outcome might require further monetary policy tightening. Growth
in consumer spending was projected to slow in response to smaller
gains in employment and income, some reductions in pent-up demands,
and the adverse effects on household financial wealth of earlier
increases in interest rates and declines in stock market prices.
Business fixed investment, while remaining relatively brisk, was
expected to decelerate somewhat over the forecast horizon, primarily
owing to smaller projected gains in sales, a growing shortfall of
corporate cash flow relative to capital outlays, and higher financing
costs. Single-family housing construction would continue to be damped
by the higher mortgage rates; however, the pace of homebuilding was
expected to remain relatively robust compared with the rate of recent
years, reflecting still unsatisfied demand for homeownership and the
relatively favorable cash-flow affordability of housing, as judged by
the standards of the past two decades. The restraint on economic
activity exerted by weak export demand was projected to diminish as
economic conditions improved abroad, given the competitiveness of U.S.
produced goods.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that final aggregate demand
appeared to have slowed somewhat in recent months but that the
expansion still seemed to have considerable underlying momentum.
Indeed, available data on the various components of spending taken
together might in fact be understating the growth in economic
activity; the strength of labor markets and measures of gross domestic
income suggested a somewhat stronger economic performance. Sustained
expansion, perhaps at a pace broadly in line with or a bit above the
economy's long-run growth potential, remained a reasonable
expectation, but many members observed that they saw the risks as
being on the upside of such a projection in the absence of some
further policy tightening. Views varied to some degree with regard to
available margins of unemployed resources, but the members agreed that
the economy probably was operating very close to, and in the view of
some might have reached, its long-run potential. In these
circumstances, the members saw appreciable risks of intensifying
pressures on resources and higher inflation. Broad measures of wages
and prices suggested little change in inflation trends in recent
quarters, but worrisome signs of greater inflation were evident in the
prices of materials purchased by business firms and in anecdotal
reports of successful efforts by an increasing number of businesses to
pass on rising costs by raising prices.
In their comments on business conditions in different parts
of the nation, members reported continuing expansion ranging from
modest to solid growth in most regions, However, the rise in business
activity appeared to have slowed in some areas and business conditions
had remained essentially unchanged in a number of others, notably in
California. In the course of their review, members pointed to the
general strength in labor markets as evidenced, for example, by
statistical indications of large and persisting gains in employment
and relatively low initial claims for unemployment compensation.
These data for the national economy were reinforced by reports of
sizable employment increases in numerous industries and parts of the
country and associated indications of growing labor shortages in a
number of areas and some occupations.
The financial climate remained supportive of sustained
economic growth. It was clear that the rise in interest rates since
the start of the year had had some restraining effects on interest-sensitive expenditures, notably housing and perhaps to a lesser extent
some consumer durables, but to date these effects had not been large.
Moreover, surveys and anecdotal reports suggested that banking
institutions were becoming increasingly aggressive in their efforts to
foster loan growth by easing many terms and standards for lending. In
financial markets more generally, risk spreads had remained relatively
narrow and both debt and equity markets appeared to be well positioned
to provide ample financing for further economic expansion.
In their review of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members saw widespread evidence of a well established
expansion. Some signs of moderation from the rapid advance in recent
quarters had emerged, including statistical and anecdotal indications
of somewhat slower growth of consumer spending. Members noted,
however, that an apparently significant portion of the recent weakness
in sales of motor vehicles appeared to be related to supply shortages
that were in the process of being corrected. Consumer confidence
remained at a high level and likely reflected, among other factors,
the strength in job markets in many parts of the country. Nonetheless, more moderate consumer spending was a reasonable expectation
in the context of a low saving rate, increased consumer debt levels,
and higher interest rates. One member commented that some pause in
the expansion of overall consumer spending would not be unusual after
several quarters of robust growth, and another remarked that the rise
in household expenditures had been larger than the increase in
household cash incomes by an appreciable margin over the past year.
Further marked expansion in business-fixed investment was
likely to make a sizable contribution to continuing economic growth.
Ongoing strength in orders, including foreign demand, pointed to rapid
further growth in expenditures for business equipment over coming
months. Some moderation in the growth of such spending appeared
likely later in the context of projected slower expansion in sales and
the rise in financing costs. The outlook for nonresidential
construction, while not ebullient, nonetheless seemed likely to become
a more positive factor in fostering further economic growth. Demand
for commercial real estate space, including office space, had begun to
improve in many areas. Against this background and given the apparent
availability of financing for soundly based projects, nonresidential
construction activity, while displaying considerable local variation,
appeared to be on a moderate uptrend for the nation as a whole.
Prospective developments in foreign trade also were expected
to have a positive effect on the expansion of the domestic economy and
indeed to offset some of the anticipated slowing in the overall growth
of domestic demand. Economic conditions abroad were improving faster
than had been anticipated, and this development along with the decline
in the foreign exchange value of the dollar was projected to stimulate
faster growth in exports while curbing that of imports over the next
several quarters.
Members focused on recent inventory developments, which in
the context of some moderation in the growth of final demand had
accounted for a considerable portion of the overall expansion in GDP
reported for the second quarter. While the rate of inventory
accumulation could be expected to slow in the current quarter, the
extent of that slowing and its retarding effects on near-term economic
growth were uncertain. Partly on the basis of anecdotal reports, the
members concluded that much of the inventory buildup in the second
quarter was voluntary, thereby reducing the probability of a sharp
reversal. Indeed, to the degree that delivery lead times might edge
up in various industries as capacity constraints were encountered,
stronger efforts to build inventories could emerge, especially against
the background of currently low inventory-to-sales ratios. Some
business contacts reported that they were planning to add to their
inventories over the months ahead. At the same time, ongoing business
efforts to maintain relatively lean inventories undoubtedly would tend
to limit any broad buildup in inventories.
With regard to the outlook for residential construction,
members reported some slowing in single-family housing demand in many
parts of the country as homebuyers reacted to the rise in mortgage
interest rates. However, single-family homebuilding activity was
being maintained at relatively robust levels in some areas and
multifamily housing construction was improving in numerous local
markets. On balance, the housing sector probably would contribute
little, if any, impetus to the expansion but homebuilding was likely
to remain well above its earlier depressed levels.
In their assessment of the outlook for inflation, many
members focused on the prospects for further growth in output in the
context of diminishing margins of unemployed production resources.
It was difficult to assess the extent of remaining margins of
available resources, in part because of uncertainty about the effects
on capacity of ongoing efforts to improve productivity through
business restructurings and sharp increases in business investment
expenditures. Despite somewhat differing views, the members generally
concluded that the economy probably was operating at a level that was
quite close to, if not already at, its long-run potential. In the
circumstances, many of the members commented that the risks of
intensifying inflation clearly were on the upside if the economic
expansion did not moderate from its pace in recent quarters.
Indications of accelerating cost and price pressures were not yet
visible in broad measures of inflation and wages. Those measures,
while subject to fluctuations largely associated with swings in food
and energy prices, had not displayed any discernible trend over the
past several quarters. At the same time, signs of increasing prices
and costs at earlier stages of production appeared to be multiplying,
including sizable price increases for a wide range of industrial
commodities. More generally, members cited a growing number of
reports by business firms of rising input costs and of more successful
efforts by some firms to raise prices. It also was noted that the
decline in the value of the dollar would contribute, directly and
indirectly, to some upward pressures on prices. However, business
contacts, notably at the retail level, indicated that competition
remained intense and made it very difficult to pass on cost increases
through higher prices, thereby placing a premium on continued efforts
to contain costs through improvements in productivity. From a
differing perspective, one member noted that decelerating growth in
money measures such as Ml, the monetary base, and reserves--which had
been expanding rapidly for several years--implied that monetary policy
had been moved substantially to curtail any increase in inflation
pressures, though more action might still be required.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, the members agreed that a prompt further tightening move
was needed to provide greater assurance that inflationary pressures in
the economy would remain subdued. The members recognized that the
Committee's earlier policy actions were exerting some restraining
effects and that further lagged effects from those actions could be
expected. Even so, the underlying strength in demand and narrow
margins of slack in the economy pointed to a considerable risk of
further inflation pressures in the absence of additional policy
tightening.
With regard to the size of the policy adjustment, the members
were apprised of a disposition on the part of the Board of Governors
to approve the 1/2 percentage point increase in the discount rate that
was pending at several Federal Reserve Banks. The Committee members
endorsed a proposal to allow the effects of such a rise in the
discount rate, should it be approved, to be reflected fully in reserve
markets. Consideration was given to a lesser adjustment in reserve
conditions, but the members concluded that a smaller step was unlikely
to be adequate, and on perceiving this, financial markets would
quickly build in further monetary tightening, the unknown size and
timing of which would add to market uncertainty and volatility. A
more decisive policy move might reduce the need for further tightening
later, or possibly even avert that need entirely, by moderating or
arresting the inflationary momentum in the economy more promptly and
by helping to curb inflationary expectations more effectively.
In considering possible adjustments to policy during the
period before the next meeting, all the members favored moving to a
symmetric intermeeting instruction. Such a directive would be
consistent with the members' expectations that a further policy action
was not likely to be needed for some time, given the substantial
nature of today's policy move. However, a symmetrical directive would
not rule out the possibility of a policy move in the event that
intermeeting developments differed substantially from expectations.
At the conclusion of the Committee's policy discussion, all
the members indicated they could support a directive that called for
increasing somewhat the degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase in the discount rate, and that
did not include a presumption about possible adjustments to policy
during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. According to a staff
analysis, the reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting would be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the pace of economic expansion, though still
substantial, may have moderated somewhat recently,
while resource utilization has remained at high levels.
Nonfarm payroll employment continued to advance at a
robust pace in July, but the civilian unemployment rate
edged up to 6.1 percent--about the same as the average
for the second quarter. Industrial production rose
appreciably over June and July. Growth in consumer
spending has slowed in recent months, owing in part to
constraints on the supply of motor vehicles. Housing
starts rose in July. Orders for nondefense capital
goods point to a continued strong expansion in spending
on business equipment; permits for nonresidential
construction have been rising as well. Business
inventories registered a large increase in the second
quarter, but inventories appeared to have remained
broadly in line with sales. The average nominal
deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services was larger
in April and May than the average for the first
quarter. Increases in broad indexes of consumer and
producer prices have remained moderate in recent
months, apart from the effect of short-run swings in
volatile food and energy components.
Most market interest rates are unchanged to up
slightly on balance since the July meeting. The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies was unchanged on balance over the inter-meeting period.
M2 and M3 turned up in July following declines on
average in both aggregates over May and June; for the
year through July, M2 and M3 grew at rates slightly
above the bottom of their ranges for 1994. Total
domestic nonfinancial debt has continued to expand at
a moderate rate in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of
1994. The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases could
persist during the year and that money growth within
these ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year. For 1995, the Committee agreed
on tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of
1995, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for
M3. The Committee provisionally set the associated
monitoring range for growth of domestic nonfinancial
debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1995. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to increase somewhat the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions,
taking account of a possible increase in the discount
rate. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated  reserve conditions are  expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2  and M3  over coming
months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan,
Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, and Parry and Mses.
Phillips and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, September 27, 1994.
The meeting adjourned at 12:30 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007