FRB: FOMC Minutes--July 5-6, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of July 5-6, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, July 5, 1995, at 2:30 p.m., and
continued on Thursday, July 6, 1995, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Ms. Brown, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter, Lindsey,
Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, and Slifman,
Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Clouse1 and Roberts,1 Economists,
Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum,
Sniderman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, Dallas,
Cleveland, and Atlanta respectively
Ms. Krieger and Mr. Miller, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
Minneapolis respectively
1.  Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's review of
the economic outlook and policy discussion.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on May 23, 1995, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System foreign
currency transactions during the period May 23, 1995, through July 5,
1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period May 23,
1995, through July 5, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook, the ranges for growth of money and debt in 1995 and
1996, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting
period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial information
available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion
is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was
approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
level of economic activity was about unchanged in the second quarter.
Consumer spending apparently remained sluggish, and business spending
on plant and equipment rose less rapidly than in other recent
quarters. With final sales flagging, firms sought to hold down
production and employment in order to keep inventories under control.
Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices had increased faster on
balance thus far this year, but signs of some moderation in inflation
were evident in recent price data. Growth of labor compensation costs
remained subdued.
Nonfarm payroll employment fell substantially in May after a
small decline in April and reduced gains in the first quarter.
Payrolls in the services industry continued to rise in May, but the
pace of hiring was well below the average rate of increase over other
recent months. In manufacturing and construction, employment
contracted further in May, although part of the job decline in
construction might have been temporary, reflecting heavy rains and
floods in the South. The civilian unemployment rate edged lower in
May, to 5.7 percent, but was somewhat above its average for the first
quarter.
Industrial production continued to weaken in May, and
incoming data suggested a further decline in June. Manufacturing
output fell in May for a fourth consecutive month, reflecting another
cutback in the production of motor vehicles. Output of non-auto
manufactured goods was unchanged, with increases in the production of
nondurable consumer goods and non-auto business equipment offsetting
declines in output elsewhere. Utilization of manufacturing capacity
dropped again in May but was still at a relatively high level.
Nominal retail sales were about unchanged over April and May.
Purchases at furniture and appliance stores were up slightly on
balance over the two months. Sales at automotive dealerships and
apparel outlets fell in April but revived somewhat in May. Spending
at building materials stores fell in both months. The retail sales
reports, in combination with data on consumer prices and unit motor-vehicle sales, suggested that inflation-adjusted spending for consumer
goods had changed little since the fourth quarter of last year.
Housing starts were unchanged on balance over April and May; a
reduction in starts of single-family homes was offset by a rise in
starts of multifamily units. Adverse weather in some parts of the
country might have contributed to the sluggishness in starts. Home
sales were higher in May: Sales of new homes turned up sharply, and
sales of existing homes also advanced somewhat.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods increased considerably
in May after being unchanged in April. Shipments of computing
equipment remained robust on balance over April and May, but growth of
shipments of other business equipment slowed significantly. Sales of
heavy trucks rebounded strongly in May from an April decline. Recent
data on new orders for nondefense capital goods suggested that
spending on business equipment might moderate somewhat in the months
ahead after an extended period of rapid expansion. Nonresidential
construction continued to trend appreciably higher in April;
particularly large gains were recorded in the public utility,
industrial, and institutional categories.
Business inventories grew at a little slower rate in April
than in the first quarter. In manufacturing, inventory investment
remained brisk in April but slowed somewhat in May; the inventory-to-sales ratio for the two months was at the high end of the range for
the past year. At the wholesale level, the rate of increase in stocks
in April equaled the first-quarter pace and the ratio of stocks to
sales reached its highest level in several years. Inventory
accumulation in the retail sector was more moderate in April. More
than half the rise occurred at automotive establishments. The
inventory-to-sales ratio for retailers other than auto dealers had
remained stable for a number of months and was near the middle of its
range for recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened substantially in April from its average rate for the first
quarter. The value of imports was up sharply, with increases posted
in nearly all major import categories. The value of exports rose
modestly from the first-quarter level; increases in exports of
aircraft and industrial supplies were partially offset by declines in
exports of automotive products to Canada and Mexico. Available data
indicated that, on average, economic growth in the major foreign
industrial countries had been sluggish in the first quarter and
apparently had remained so in the second quarter; growth had been
particularly weak in Canada and Japan.
Incoming data suggested that price inflation might be slowing
a little after having picked up early in the year. Consumer prices
rose a bit less in May; energy prices recorded another sizable
increase, but food prices changed little and prices of other items
advanced more slowly. However, for the twelve months ended in May,
prices of nonfood, non-energy consumer items increased slightly more
than in the preceding twelve months. At the producer level, prices of
finished goods were unchanged in May, reflecting declines in the
prices of finished foods and finished energy goods; excluding food and
energy, prices of finished goods rose in May at the same rate as in
April. For the year ending in May, producer prices rose moderately
after being essentially unchanged in the previous year. At earlier
stages of production, producer prices grew at a considerably slower
rate or declined in May, suggesting some easing of cost pressures over
the next few months. Average hourly compensation in the nonfarm
business sector accelerated in the first quarter of the year, owing in
large part to temporary developments. Over the year ended in March,
this compensation measure increased somewhat more than it had over the
previous year. Average hourly earnings declined in May, but the
change in hourly earnings over the past twelve months was slightly
larger than the advance over the preceding twelve-month period.
At its meeting on May 23, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable
during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated
with this directive were expected to be consistent with moderate
growth in the broader monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. The federal funds rate generally remained near 6 percent,
but most short-term interest rates were down on balance in response to
incoming economic data, particularly the employment report for May,
that were seen by market participants as increasing the likelihood
that monetary policy would be eased in the near future. Longer-term
interest rates also declined in reaction to growing indications that
efforts to narrow substantially the U.S. budget deficit might be
successful. Yields on corporate and municipal obligations fell less
than Treasury rates and risk spreads widened a little, particularly
for junk bonds. Major indexes of equity prices rose over the
intermeeting period, partly in response to lower interest rates.
In foreign exchange markets over the intermeeting period, the
trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies declined considerably on balance. The dollar fell sharply
in the week after the May meeting on further news of weakening in the
U.S. economy but rebounded somewhat at the end of the month when
concerted central-bank intervention was carried out. The dollar
remained relatively stable over the balance of the period.
Growth of M2 strengthened substantially in May and June.
Downward adjustments in returns on deposits and retail money fund
shares had lagged declines in market interest rates in recent months,
and investors evidently responded by shifting funds from market
instruments into these M2 assets. For the year through June, M2
expanded at a rate in the upper half of its range for 1995. M3 also
accelerated in May and June; and for the year through June, this
aggregate grew at a rate well above the annual range set in February.
The pickup in M3 growth importantly reflected more rapid inflows to
institution-only money funds, whose yields also adjusted sluggishly to
falling money market rates. Total domestic nonfinancial debt had
grown at a rate in the upper half of its monitoring range in recent
months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic activity would expand sluggishly over the next few months as
business firms adjusted production schedules to bring inventories into
better alignment with sales. Subsequently, as inventory positions
were corrected, and with underlying support for final sales from the
favorable wealth and interest-cost effects of the extended rally in
the equity and debt markets, the economy would begin to expand at a
moderate pace. The forecast assumed a modest step-up in the pace of
consumer spending in response to some diminution of concerns about job
prospects and incomes as well as improved financial conditions and
household balance sheets. Homebuilding was projected to pick up
somewhat in lagged response to the recent decline in mortgage rates
and the related improvement in housing affordability. Business
outlays for new equipment were expected to slow from the very rapid
pace of the past few years in response to the slower growth of sales
and profits, but lower costs of capital and the ready availability of
financing would help to sustain appreciable growth in such investment.
Export expansion would pick up in response to some anticipated
strengthening in the economies of major U.S. trading partners.
Considerable uncertainty continued to surround the fiscal outlook, but
in light of recent developments the forecast now reflected a greater
degree of fiscal restraint. In the staff's judgment, the prospects
for some easing of pressure on labor and other resources suggested
that price inflation likely would moderate from its recently higher
level.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the apparent pause in
the expansion was likely to prove temporary, and their forecasts
generally pointed to an upturn in overall economic activity to a pace
in the neighborhood of the economy's potential by the latter part of
this year or early 1996. Many emphasized that the prospects for a
strengthening economy were enhanced by the drop in intermediate- and
long-term interest rates and the rise in equity prices. In the view
of most members, however, the risks to the outlook were tilted to the
downside. Several stressed that the ongoing adjustments to business
inventories could prove to be more pronounced and of longer duration
than they anticipated, with negative repercussions on production and
incomes and in turn on consumer spending and business investment.
Other downside risks included the adverse implications for exports of
potentially less-than-projected expansion in a number of major foreign
economies. Nonetheless, recent developments suggested that the period
of maximum risk to the domestic expansion might have passed. With
pressures on resources having diminished and likely to ease somewhat
further and with labor costs remaining subdued, the risk of continuing
increases in inflation had fallen considerably; indeed, in the view of
many members inflation should moderate over the projection period.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
sets its long-run ranges for the money and debt aggregates, the
members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank presidents not
currently serving as members provided their individual projections of
the growth in real and nominal GDP, the rate of unemployment, and the
rate of inflation for the years 1995 and 1996. The forecasts of the
rate of expansion in real GDP for 1995 as a whole had a central
tendency of 1-1/2 to 2 percent, reflecting expectations of a pickup in
growth to a moderate pace in the second half of the year; for 1996,
projections of growth in real GDP centered on a range of 2-1/4 to
2-3/4 percent. With regard to the expansion of nominal GDP, the
growth forecasts were concentrated in a range of 4-1/4 to 4-3/4
percent for 1995 and 4-3/4 to 5-3/8 percent for 1996. The rate of
unemployment associated with these forecasts was expected to edge
higher in the second half of this year to a consensus range of 5-3/4
to 6-1/8 percent in the fourth quarters of both 1995 and 1996.
Projections of the rate of inflation, as measured by the consumer
price index, pointed to a small decline over the projection horizon;
the projections converged on rates of 3-1/8 to 3-3/8 percent for 1995
and 2-7/8 to 3-1/4 percent for 1996.
In the course of the discussion, members indicated that much
of the economic information that had become available since the May
meeting had suggested a greater softening in the economy than they had
anticipated and had raised concerns about the timing and strength of
the upturn over coming quarters. However, the most recent data and
some of the anecdotal reports from around the country had a better
tone. Among the positive factors in the economic outlook, members
gave particular emphasis to the favorable financial climate, including
the stimulative effects of lower interest rates on interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy, the ready availability of financing from
market sources and banking institutions, and the impact of rising
equity and bond prices on balance sheets. Business and consumer
sentiment also remained generally favorable, though anecdotal reports
suggested a heightened degree of caution among business contacts in
many parts of the nation. Members observed that the expansion did not
appear to have produced overall imbalances in the economy aside from
an apparent overhang of inventories in some industries. The ongoing
adjustments needed to bring these inventories down to desired levels
were seen as the most serious threat to the expansion. Some members
commented that the inventory correction in the second quarter appeared
on the basis of the available evidence to be less than was expected
earlier and that the period of inventory adjustment might therefore be
more extended in time than they had anticipated. While such a
development might not in itself be sufficient to tilt the economy into
recession, in the possible context of relatively sluggish growth in
final demands, the economy would be vulnerable to adverse domestic or
external shocks. On balance, while the timing remained uncertain, a
resumption of growth at a moderate rate was viewed as a likely
prospect, given the underlying strength of the economy.
In their review of prospective developments in key sectors of
the economy, members noted that consumer expenditures had fallen short
of earlier expectations, but signs of some firming were visible,
notably the indications of an improvement in sales of motor vehicles
since early spring. While a continued sluggish performance of the
consumer sector could not be ruled out, the members generally expected
a resumption of moderate growth in consumer spending. The upturn
undoubtedly would be limited to some extent by the apparent exhaustion
of much of the earlier pent-up demands and perhaps by concerns about
job prospects and incomes, but the effects of reduced interest rates
on borrowers and the wealth effects from gains in values of financial
assets should help to sustain moderate growth. Moreover, if the
strengthening in housing activity materialized as projected, sales of
consumer durables would be favorably affected. While consumer
confidence had declined earlier, recent surveys indicated that
confidence had stabilized or even edged up more recently and was in
any event at relatively high levels in most parts of the country.
Business fixed investment appeared to have moderated since
earlier in the year, though expenditures for both producer durable
equipment and nonresidential structures were still registering strong
gains. Further moderation was anticipated over the course of coming
quarters in association with slower growth in business sales and
decreased pressures on producer resources. While some concern was
expressed about the vulnerability of capital spending to a downturn in
the growth of sales, the members generally expected this sector of the
economy to remain a positive factor in the expansion. The ready
availability of financing on favorable terms and the ongoing need to
modernize equipment and other producer resources for competitive
reasons, notably to take advantage of continuing improvements in
computer and other technologies, should foster continued overall
growth in business investment. Members also noted that the strength
in business profits, though likely to moderate cyclically at some
point, remained a favorable factor undergirding business capital
spending.
Housing activity had stagnated in recent months, but this
sector of the economy also was expected to provide some stimulus to
the expansion as home buyers responded to reduced mortgage rates.
Although the latest available data indicated that housing starts were
still relatively depressed, home sales and mortgage loan applications
for home purchases had strengthened recently. With some exceptions,
building industry contacts in local areas tended to confirm broader
indications that improvement in housing activity was occurring.
Members also noted that rising occupancy levels and rents should
support fairly robust construction of multifamily housing in many
areas.
With regard to the outlook for fiscal policy, members gave
considerable emphasis to recent developments in Congress which
suggested that there could be greater deficit reduction over the years
ahead than had been built into many forecasts. The direct effects of
deficit cutbacks would tend to hold down the growth in final demand
and act as a restraining influence on overall economic activity over
the projection horizon. But those cutbacks also would have favorable
effects on financial markets, thereby stimulating to an extent
offsetting increases in spending. Over the longer run, deficit
reduction should enhance the performance and growth of the economy,
though monetary policy makers would need to carefully monitor possible
transition effects.
A considerable downside risk in the view of many members was
the outlook for exports. Economic activity in the major foreign
industrial nations had been more sluggish than anticipated during the
first half of the year, and this raised questions about the strength
of the expansion in those countries and the related prospects for the
faster growth in U.S. exports. Most of the major economies in Latin
America also were projected to strengthen, and indeed such
expectations were reflected in financial markets, but substantial
problems remained that could undermine the favorable outlook. On the
positive side, members observed that U.S. exports were now quite
competitive in world markets, as evidenced by continuing gains in
exports to numerous countries, and such a perception was reinforced by
anecdotal reports of increasing foreign sales of a variety of products
by firms around the country. On balance, some growth in exports
remained a reasonable prospect but it might fall below current
expectations.
The members generally agreed that the inflation risks in the
economy had diminished, though some still saw the potential for
little or no progress in unwinding the recent uptick in inflation.
Many referred to indications of easing pressures on resources in
recent months, and they generally felt that such pressures would be
contained over the projection horizon if economic growth were to
materialize in line with their forecasts. Developments seen as
consistent with such an expectation included persisting anecdotal
reports of highly competitive markets that made it very difficult for
business firms to pass on cost increases or to raise profit margins.
Moreover, despite continuing reports of labor scarcities in some areas
and industries, increases in nominal labor costs generally had
remained subdued across the nation. Prices of many raw materials and
semi-finished goods had increased sharply in earlier months and these
increases would continue to put upward pressure on the prices of
finished goods, but there recently had been signs of some abatement of
inflation at the earlier stages of production. Similarly, earlier
declines in the foreign exchange value of the dollar were placing
upward pressure on the prices of many imported products, but the
recent stability of the dollar promised a diminution of such pressure
over time. On balance, most of the members believed that the
underlying trend of inflation was now tilted toward gradual
deceleration in the context of marginally higher rates of unemployed
labor and other resources, but they acknowledged that the risks to
such an outcome remained substantial.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth in the monetary and
debt aggregates that it had established in February for 1995 and it
decided on tentative ranges for growth in those aggregates in 1996.
The current ranges set in February for the period from the fourth
quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995 included expansion of 1
to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. A monitoring range for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set at 3 to 7
percent for 1995.
In the Committee's discussion, the members took account of
the accelerated rates of M2 and M3 growth since early spring that, for
the year to date, had lifted the expansion of M2 to the upper half of
the Committee's range and the expansion of M3 further above its
range. According to a staff projection, the growth of both aggregates
was likely to moderate over the balance of the year, assuming an
unchanged monetary policy, as rates paid on various components of the
aggregates were adjusted more fully to the reductions in market
interest rates that had occurred since early in the year. Even so,
the projected growth of the broad aggregates would remain well above
that experienced over the last several years. These developments
implied velocity behavior for these aggregates that was more in line
with historical patterns after several years of pronounced and
atypical velocity increases. The members noted that financial
innovations, technical changes, and deregulation had obscured
historical distinctions among various financial instruments and had
affected the extent to which holders might shift funds into or out of
components of the monetary aggregates in response to changing interest
rate patterns. As a result, substantial uncertainty remained about
projections of money growth and the future relationships of money and
debt to the basic objectives of monetary policy. Against this
background, members expressed somewhat differing views regarding
appropriate ranges for the growth of M2 and M3 in 1995 and 1996.
With regard to M2, a majority of the members favored or could
accept a proposal to maintain the existing 1 to 5 percent range for
both years. These members noted that M2 growth was projected to
remain within the current range, though in the upper half in 1995 and
at the top in 1996. While recognizing that expansion at a rate above
that range could not be ruled out, especially for 1996, they suggested
that an increase in the range, at a time when substantial
uncertainties continued to surround the relationship of M2 to broad
measures of economic performance, would imply a degree of confidence
regarding the relationship that the Committee did not possess at this
point. Moreover, if the more normal behavior of velocity over the
past several quarters were to continue, a 1 to 5 percent range for
growth of M2 likely would prove consistent with the Committee's
ultimate objectives of sustained economic expansion and reasonable
price stability. There was concern that an increase in the M2 range
could foster a misreading of the Committee's intentions, especially if
some easing in policy were to be approved during this meeting,
explanations of the technical reasons notwithstanding.
Members preferring a somewhat higher M2 range emphasized
that expectations for growth of this aggregate in 1995 and 1996 were
around the upper end of the current range. In their view, under the
Federal Reserve Act, the Committee's target ranges--and normally their
midpoints--should be consistent with the Committee's expectations for
growth in nominal GDP and money. From this perspective, a higher M2
range was clearly defensible and the reasons for it easily
communicated. Indeed, a failure to adjust the range upward could be
interpreted by observers as indicating an intent to tighten policy
should M2 growth remain high in relation to its current range.
With regard to M3, all the members indicated that they
preferred or could accept an increase in its range to 2 to 6 percent
for both years. The current 0 to 4 percent range was quite low in
relation to the range for M2, judging by the average historical growth
of this aggregate relative to that of M2. The range had been adopted
in the light of unusual developments that had depressed M3 growth over
much of the 1990s. Those developments, which also had served to curb
M2 growth though to a lesser extent, involved a reduced role of
banking institutions in the intermediation of flows of funds between
savers and borrowers. That reduced role had been induced to a large
degree by balance sheet adjustments undertaken in response to
extraordinary strains experienced by banks and thrifts. Against the
background of favorable economic developments, the financial health of
depository institutions had improved markedly over the last few years,
and the increased ability and willingness of these institutions to
serve as financial intermediaries appeared to be working toward
strengthening the growth of M3 and lowering its velocity. In the
circumstances, the members believed that the contemplated increase in
the M3 range was essentially a technical response to developments that
were tending to restore both traditional financing patterns and the
historical pattern of somewhat faster growth in M3 than in M2. In
this respect, the increase in the M3 range did not have any
implications for the underlying thrust of monetary policy, though the
higher range could prove to be more consistent over time with
sustainable and noninflationary economic growth. As in the case of
the current M2 range, that conclusion assumed the eventual restoration
of historic relationships between M3 and measures of overall economic
performance.
The Committee was unanimous in its view that the current
monitoring range for the growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
should be retained for 1995 and extended to 1996. This view took into
account staff projections indicating that the debt aggregate was
likely to grow at rates well within its 3 to 7 percent range--indeed,
not far from the midpoint--in both years.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee voted to
reaffirm the range of 1 to 5 percent for growth of M2 in 1995 and to
set the same range on a tentative basis for 1996:
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey, Melzer,
Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, and Ms. Phillips.
Votes against this action: Mr. Blinder
and Ms. Yellen.
Mr. Blinder and Ms. Yellen dissented on a technical judgment,
not a policy difference. They noted that if growth in the demand for
M2 were close to historic norms in 1995 or 1996, as indeed it had been
for some time, then the Committee members' projections for nominal GDP
would likely imply M2 growth near the top of, or even above, the
current range. While the relationship between the growth of M2 and
that of nominal GDP remained subject to a great deal of uncertainty,
they were persuaded that the range--in fact, the midpoint of the
range--should normally be consistent with members' forecasts of
nominal GDP growth. This would be truer to the spirit of the
aggregates targeting provision in the Federal Reserve Act. From this
perspective, they viewed a higher M2 range for 1995 and 1996 as
clearly preferable in communicating the Committee's objectives for the
economy and its expectations for money growth.
The Committee then voted to raise the range for growth of M3
to 2 to 6 percent for 1995 and to extend that higher range
provisionally to 1996:
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, and Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
The Committee voted to retain the 3 to 7 percent monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt for 1995 and to
extend that range on a tentative basis to 1996:
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, and Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
These votes constituted approval of the following paragraph
for the directive that would be issued at the end of the meeting:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee
reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the course of the Committee's discussion of its monetary
growth ranges, members commented on the failure of the monetary
aggregates to provide a reliable nominal anchor for the conduct of
monetary policy in recent years. Moreover, the restoration of
historic relationships, or the emergence of new but stable
relationships, between money growth and measures of progress toward
broad economic objectives could not be predicted with any degree of
confidence. Some members expressed the view that in these
circumstances the Committee needed to continue to look at potential
alternative approaches to guide the formulation of policy and to
communicate its intentions to the public, especially with respect to
the Committee's objective of promoting price stability over time.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, nearly all the members indicated that they favored or
could support a proposal to ease slightly the current degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Preferences for an unchanged policy
stance and for somewhat greater easing also were expressed. In
support of at least slight easing, members commented that they viewed
current monetary policy as somewhat restrictive, judged in part by the
level of the inflation-adjusted federal funds rate. This degree of
monetary restraint had been appropriate early in the year when the
economy was operating at or possibly beyond its long-run potential and
inflation pressures appeared to be mounting. Some modest easing was
desirable now that the growth of the economy had slowed considerably
more than anticipated and potential inflationary pressures seemed to
be in the process of receding. Although inflation was higher than in
1994 and the economy was still operating at an elevated level, looking
forward many members saw prospects for declining inflation and the
possibility of shortfalls in economic growth. The members agreed that
under present economic conditions a slight easing of the stance of
policy would incur little risk of stimulating increased inflation and
would be entirely consistent with their commitment to continued
progress toward price stability over time. Several members also
observed that any move toward less restraint should be cautious at
this point because easing would represent a change in the direction of
policy and its repercussions on financial markets, including the
foreign exchange markets, could be relatively pronounced.
A few members preferred somewhat greater easing. They
stressed that such a move was warranted by the recent pause in the
expansion and the apparent vulnerability of the economy to a variety
of downside risks. Indeed, a move from what they saw as a restrictive
monetary policy toward a more neutral policy stance was somewhat
overdue in their view. While they could support a slight adjustment
to policy at this point, these members were persuaded that the stance
of monetary policy probably would need to be eased by more than a
slight amount over time to accommodate the intermediate- and long-term
needs of an expanding economy. Moreover, the risks of increasing
inflationary pressures appeared to be relatively remote in the context
of the current and anticipated performance of the overall economy.
The declines in intermediate- and long-term interest rates were
helping to support the expansion, but those declines rested in part on
market expectations of significant monetary policy easing; failure to
ratify such expectations could well result in at least a partial
reversal of those desirably lower rates.
Members who leaned toward an unchanged policy remained
concerned about the persistence of inflationary pressures and whether
a somewhat easier policy stance would be consistent with the objective
of capping inflation and setting the stage for further progress toward
price stability. The available evidence on the economy's current
performance remained mixed and most forecasts pointed to moderate
strengthening ahead; in the circumstances an easing move did not
appear to be needed at this time. One member emphasized that,
while the risks of greater inflation seemed small, the costs of a
policy error in the direction of too much easing would be high in
terms of its effects on the credibility of the System's anti-inflationary policy and the need to rein in inflationary growth next
year. Although their preference would be to wait for further evidence
on the performance of the economy, all but one of these members
indicated that, given the current uncertainties surrounding the
economic outlook and the small amount of easing that was proposed,
they would not dissent from the majority position.
With regard to possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, most of the members who favored some easing also
preferred an asymmetric directive, including a marked preference on
the part of those who supported greater easing than the majority. An
asymmetric directive was consistent with the view shared by most
members that the risks to the expansion were biased to the downside,
but no member expressed a strong presumption about the likely need to
ease policy during the weeks ahead. The Committee would, of course,
monitor and respond as needed to the incoming economic information.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all but one
of the members indicated that they favored or could support a
directive that called for some slight easing in the degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that included a bias toward possible further
easing of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the
Committee decided that somewhat greater monetary restraint might be
acceptable or somewhat lesser monetary restraint would be acceptable
during the intermeeting period. According to a staff analysis, the
reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting would be consistent
with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the level of economic activity was about unchanged
in the second quarter. Nonfarm payroll employment fell
in April and May after posting reduced gains in the
first quarter, and the civilian unemployment rate, at
5.7 percent in May, was up somewhat from its first-quarter average. Industrial production continued to
decline in May, reflecting another cutback in the
production of motor vehicles, and capacity utilization
was down somewhat further. Total retail sales have
been sluggish on average in recent months. Housing
starts were about unchanged over April and May, but
sales of new homes turned up sharply in May. Orders
for nondefense capital goods have moderated somewhat in
recent months but still point to considerable further
expansion of spending on business equipment; nonresidential construction has continued to trend
appreciably higher. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade
in goods and services widened in April from its average
rate in the first quarter. Broad indexes of consumer
and producer prices have increased faster on average
thus far this year, though there were signs of some
moderation in the most recent data; advances in labor
compensation costs have remained subdued.
Most interest rates have declined somewhat further
since the Committee meeting on May 23. In foreign
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined
considerably over the intermeeting period.
M2 and M3 strengthened substantially in May and
June. For the year through June, M2 expanded at a rate
in the upper half of its range for 1995 and M3 grew at
a rate well above its range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has grown at a rate in the upper half of
its monitoring range in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee
reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Kelley, Lindsey, Melzer,
Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips and
Yellen.
Vote against this action: Mr. Hoenig.
Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed the stance of
monetary policy should remain unchanged at this time. With the pace
of economic activity likely to return to trend growth later this year
and inflation expected to be higher this year and next than in 1994,
he felt an unchanged policy in the near term would enhance the
prospects of achieving the Committee's long-run objectives of
sustainable economic growth and price stability.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, August 22, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 12:20 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007