FRB: FOMC Minutes--August 22, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of August 22, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 22, 1995, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Brown, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter, Lindsey,
Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, Slifman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Ramm,1 Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Strand, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Sniderman, Mses. Tschinkel and White, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Richmond, Minneapolis, Dallas,
Cleveland, Atlanta, and New York respectively
Mr. Meyer, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia
1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's economic
discussion.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on July 5-6, 1995, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System foreign
currency transactions during the period July 6, 1995, through August
21, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these
transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period July 6,
1995, through August 21, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity was expanding more rapidly after increasing at a
sluggish pace in the second quarter. Consumer spending appeared to be
growing at a moderate rate, housing demand seemed to be rebounding
sharply, and business investment remained on a solid uptrend. With
efforts to adjust inventories still under way, industrial production
had changed little in recent months, and employment gains had been
modest. After increasing at elevated rates in the early part of the
year, consumer and producer prices had risen more slowly in recent
months. Advances in labor compensation costs remained subdued.
Nonfarm payroll employment rose further in July after a
modest second-quarter gain; the July advance was held down by
continuing employment losses in manufacturing that were widespread by
industry. Outside of manufacturing, payrolls continued to increase at
a relatively slow pace in July; reduced job growth in the services
industry reflected smaller increases in employment at business and
health service establishments. The civilian unemployment rate rose
slightly in July, returning to its second-quarter average of 5.7
percent.
Industrial production edged higher in July, but it was
unchanged on balance over the three months ending in July after
declining in earlier months. Manufacturing output fell further in
July; a sharp contraction in the production of motor vehicles and
parts accounted for the entire decline. Within manufacturing, output
of business equipment other than motor vehicles continued to advance
as additional strong gains were recorded in the production of office
and computing equipment. The output of non-auto consumer goods
weakened; a cutback in the production of home furnishings offset an
increase in the manufacture of appliances. With capacity continuing
to expand rapidly, total utilization of industrial capacity dropped
somewhat further.
Despite edging down in July, revised data for earlier months
suggested that total retail sales had risen appreciably on balance
since early spring. The July decline entirely reflected weakness in
motor vehicles; elsewhere, spending on furniture and appliances
continued to firm, and purchases of other durable goods and of apparel
rose sharply. Housing market activity picked up considerably in June,
with sales of both new and existing homes increasing significantly.
Housing starts were up strongly in July after changing little in
previous months.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods, led by surging
purchases of computing equipment, continued to grow rapidly in the
second quarter. However, business spending for transportation
equipment, notably heavy trucks and aircraft, was lackluster. New
orders for nondefense capital goods edged lower in the second quarter
after rising sharply early this year, although the elevated level of
order backlogs pointed to considerable further expansion of spending
on business equipment over coming months. Nonresidential construction
activity posted a solid gain in the second quarter, and recent data on
permits suggested further increases in building activity in coming
months.
Business inventory accumulation slowed markedly further in
June, and inventory-to-sales ratios for most types of business
establishments declined again. In manufacturing, the aggregate
inventory-to-sales ratio was only a little above the historical low
reached around the end of 1994. In the wholesale sector, the ratio of
stocks to sales in June was slightly below the top of the range
prevailing over the last year. At the retail level, inventories
changed little in June, and the inventory-to-sales ratio for this
sector was near the middle of its range for recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened in June, with exports declining marginally more than imports.
For the second quarter as a whole, the deficit was substantially
larger than in the first quarter. Exports were up considerably in the
second quarter despite declines in automotive products shipped to
Canada and Mexico, but imports rose by even more, with increases
widely spread across most major trade categories. In the major
foreign industrial countries, economic growth appeared to have ranged
from weak to moderate in the second quarter, and the limited available
evidence suggested that subdued expansion continued into the third
quarter. Economic activity remained particularly weak in Japan. In
Europe, expansion apparently was still under way, though somewhat
unevenly across countries.
Consumer prices rose more slowly in June and July, with food
and energy price movements having little effect on the overall index;
price increases for nonfood, non-energy items were somewhat smaller
than those seen earlier in the year. Over the twelve-month period
ended in July, however, this measure of consumer inflation rose at
about the same rate as in the preceding twelve months. Producer
prices of finished goods edged lower on balance in June and July,
reflecting substantial declines in prices of finished energy goods.
Excluding food and energy, producer prices rose by more over the year
ended in July than over the preceding year. At earlier stages of
production, increases in producer prices had diminished sharply in
recent months, perhaps suggesting some abatement of pressures on
production capacity and prices. Total hourly compensation for private
industry workers increased somewhat more in the second quarter than in
the first; however, the rise in compensation costs for the year ended
in June was smaller than that for the previous year, primarily
reflecting slower growth in costs of benefits. Average hourly
earnings grew faster in July than in June; for the year ending in
July, earnings rose somewhat more than in the preceding year.
At its meeting on July 5-6, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for some slight easing in the degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that included a tilt toward possible further
easing of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. The
directive stated that in the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Immediately after the meeting, open market operations were
directed toward implementing the slight easing in the degree of
reserve pressure that had been adopted by the Committee. Thereafter,
operations were conducted with a view to maintaining this slightly
more accommodative reserve posture, and the federal funds rate
remained near 5-3/4 percent over the intermeeting interval.
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged somewhat above anticipated
levels, largely reflecting heavy adjustment borrowing activity on the
August 2 reserve settlement day when demands for excess reserves were
unexpectedly large.
Treasury yields declined across the maturity spectrum in
response to the announcement of the easing action on July 6; market
participants perceived the policy move as an indication of the Federal
Reserve's concern regarding the state of the economy and, based on
historical precedent, as likely the first in a series of easing steps.
Subsequently, however, interest rates rebounded in response to
incoming economic data that were seen as suggesting stronger economic
performance and reduced chances for further monetary policy easing.
On balance, short-term market interest rates posted mixed changes over
the intermeeting period, while intermediate- and long-term rates rose
appreciably. With unexpectedly favorable corporate earnings reports
outweighing the effects of higher interest rates, major indexes of
equity prices were up moderately on balance over the period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies appreciated substantially
over the intermeeting period. The dollar's gain occurred partly in
response to the improving outlook for the U.S. economy and the related
rise in long-term interest rates in the United States. Declines in
long-term yields in the major European industrial countries probably
contributed to a higher value of the dollar in terms of the German
mark and most other European currencies. In addition, the dollar
appreciated sharply against the Japanese yen, largely in response to
actions by Japanese authorities to reduce official interest rates, to
encourage capital outflows from Japan, and to make large intervention
purchases of dollars during a period when the dollar already was
rising against the yen.
M2 and M3 continued to register sizable increases in July and
appeared to be expanding considerably further in August. The recent
strength of M2 seemed to reflect in part the relatively greater appeal
of interest rates on M2 assets in the wake of the declines in market
interest rates that had taken place this year, particularly at longer
maturities. Robust M3 growth was associated with the continuing
requirements of commercial banks for additional wholesale funds needed
to meet persisting strong loan growth. For the year through July, M2
expanded at a rate in the upper half of its range for 1995, and M3
grew at a rate above its upwardly revised range. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt had been in the upper half of its monitoring range
in recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth in economic activity would pick up from the weak pace of the
second quarter. The inventory adjustment process appeared to be well
under way, and moderate expansion of final sales would be supported by
the favorable wealth and interest-cost effects of the extended rally
in the debt and equity markets. In response to improved financial
conditions and balance sheets, consumer spending was anticipated to
keep pace with the growth of incomes. Homebuilding was expected to
strengthen somewhat in response to the earlier decline in mortgage
rates and the related improvement in housing affordability.
Accompanying slower growth of sales and profits, business investment
in new equipment and structures was projected to slow from the very
rapid pace of the past few years, although the lower cost of capital
and the ready availability of financing would help to sustain
appreciable expansion in such investment. Export growth would pick up
in response to some expected strengthening in the economies of major
trading partners. Considerable uncertainty surrounded the fiscal
outlook, but the staff continued to anticipate the greater degree of
fiscal restraint that had been projected at the time of the last
Committee meeting. In the staff's judgment, the prospects for some
further easing of pressure on labor and other resources suggested that
price inflation likely would not deviate significantly from recent
trends.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members focused on recent indications of
some strengthening in the expansion of economic activity after a
period of limited growth during the spring. Further growth in final
demand was generating an improvement in overall business activity,
despite a more rapid adjustment in inventory investment than many had
expected. This configuration suggested that the risks of recession or
an extended period of subpar growth were now reduced, and sustained
expansion at a moderate pace was seen as the most likely course for
the economy. Although the risks to the economy now seemed to be more
evenly balanced than at the time of the July meeting, they were still
sizable in both directions. In particular, uncertainties about
federal budget policies and their effects on the economy remained
substantial. With respect to prices, members noted that the recent
pause in the expansion had eased pressures on resources, and the
economy appeared to be in a better position to accommodate moderate
growth over the forecast horizon without adding to inflation. Indeed,
some members were optimistic that growth of the economy at a pace in
line with their expectations would be consistent with modest further
decreases in inflation. Others expressed concern, however, that the
uncertainties surrounding the outlook for the economy included
questions about the persistence of inflationary sentiment and the
prospects for further progress toward stable prices over the next
several quarters.
Members gave particular attention to the ongoing discussions
involving the Congress and the Administration regarding future federal
budget deficits. There was a great deal of political support for
reducing the federal deficit substantially over the years ahead;
indeed, in the view of one member the political dynamics might very
well result in larger reductions than many now anticipated.
Nonetheless, the actual outcome remained particularly uncertain. From
the perspective of its macroeconomic stabilization effects and its
implications for monetary policy, enactment of legislation involving
substantial fiscal restraint would raise the issue of fiscal drag;
however, the latter's impact on the economy would have to be judged in
the context of attendant adjustments in market interest rates and,
more broadly, in the light of emerging economic conditions. A
legislative package containing strong fiscal restraint measures would
be expected to ease pressures in debt markets--indeed, enhanced
prospects in this regard were probably already contributing to reduced
long-term interest rates. On the other hand, a package that included
only modest deficit reduction might well lead to upward pressure on
interest rates. The continuing uncertainty concerning the size of
future budget deficits might be complicated by a delay in passing
appropriations legislation in the months ahead, with potentially
dislocative effects on many federal government operations.
Accordingly, federal budget developments were seen as the major factor
likely to bear on the performance of the economy over coming months
and quarters, and these developments might well differ considerably
from current forecasts.
Members described current business conditions across the
nation as ranging from sluggish in some regions to robust in a number
of others, with at least some improvement occurring recently in many
parts of the country. There were anecdotal reports of strengthening
retail sales in numerous areas, with the notable exception of motor
vehicles, and of relatively high levels of confidence among consumers
and many retailers. Sustained growth in consumer spending was seen as
a reasonable expectation for the projection period through 1996.
However, diminished pent-up demands and possibly the increasing level
of consumer indebtedness would tend to inhibit consumer spending,
keeping its growth below that in recent years. These negative factors
might be offset to some extent by the wealth effects of the rise in
stock market prices and by a higher level of housing activity that
should help to support demands for household durables.
Members referred to recent indications, including widespread
anecdotal reports, of considerable gains in housing activity after a
period of pronounced weakness during the earlier months of the year.
Homebuyers were reacting favorably to the declines in rates on fixed-rate mortgages from their highs around the turn of the year.
Homebuilders in a number of areas were reported to be optimistic about
the outlook for further gains in housing demand, at least for single-family homes. The prospects for multifamily construction seemed less
promising; while robust activity characterized such construction in a
number of areas, still high vacancy rates and associated overbuilding
across much of the nation suggested little, if any, overall impetus
from this sector of the housing industry.
The expansion in nonresidential construction was projected to
slow from its pace in recent quarters in line with more moderate
growth in overall economic activity and reduced pressures on capacity.
Even so, with the slowing occurring only gradually as projects under
construction were completed, this sector of the economy was expected
to remain a positive factor in the overall expansion of economic
activity over the next several quarters. The members also anticipated
more moderate growth in outlays for producers' durable equipment over
the forecast horizon in conjunction with slower growth in final sales.
However, current trends pointed to further sizable increases in
outlays for office and computing equipment, and such expenditures were
expected to buttress still considerable overall growth in spending for
business equipment, though at a pace well below the exceptional rate
experienced in recent years.
Members commented that the adjustment in business inventories
appeared to have progressed a considerable distance but probably was
not yet completed for the business sector as a whole. Nonetheless,
inventory investment seemed likely to become a more neutral factor in
its effects on the overall economy as desired inventory ratios were
reached in an increasing number of industries. The recent tendency
for order patterns to stabilize was a tentative indication of such a
development. In any event, the recent upturn in final sales, apart
from its probable effects on desired inventory levels, had allowed a
larger-than-expected amount of inventory correction to occur without
preventing the economy from regaining at least moderate expansionary
momentum.
The external sector of the economy remained subject to
particular uncertainty. The members generally viewed some improvement
in the country's net export position as a reasonable expectation, but
several questioned the potential for much expansion of exports to many
of the nation's important trading partners. While recent policy
actions in Japan might have diminished concerns about the outlook for
overall exports, a number of members indicated that they continued to
anticipate fairly limited growth in foreign demands for U.S. goods and
services, with the result that the external sector was likely in their
view to make a relatively small, if any, contribution to the growth of
the domestic economy over the projection period.
Members generally viewed the near-term outlook for inflation
as more encouraging than it had appeared to be earlier this year. The
pause in the expansion during the spring had eased pressures on
resources, as evidenced in part by anecdotal reports of lessening
labor shortages in some areas and reduced use of overtime work by some
firms, and the higher rate of inflation experienced during the early
months of the year seemed unlikely to persist. The members differed
somewhat, however, in their assessment of the longer-term outlook for
inflation. Some emphasized the reduction that had occurred in
inflationary pressures, and with labor costs remaining subdued they
felt that economic growth in line with current forecasts should prove
compatible with moderating inflation over time. Further, the recent
appreciation of the dollar should contribute marginally to a more
favorable inflation outcome after some lag. Other members expressed
reservations about the prospects for an improved inflation performance
over coming quarters. They cited indications of persisting
inflationary expectations such as the recent weakness of the bond
markets and survey results that pointed to expectations of some rise
in inflation from current levels. They also referred to the
possibility that favorable labor cost developments would not persist
indefinitely in an economy that was operating in the vicinity of its
potential.
Turning to monetary policy for the intermeeting period ahead,
all the members accepted a proposal to maintain an unchanged degree of
pressure in reserve markets and to adopt a directive that was not
biased in either direction with regard to potential intermeeting
adjustments. For the near term, current trends in economic activity
and inflation appeared favorable and likely to remain so with an
unchanged policy stance. A steady policy also seemed appropriate
pending a clearer assessment of the outlook for fiscal policy. Over
the longer term, the members generally believed that consideration
would need to be given to an adjustment in the Committee's policy
stance, especially if substantial fiscal restraint were to be enacted.
The extent to which an adjustment might be needed later in the stance
of monetary policy --characterized by some members as slightly to the
restrictive side at least in terms of the inflation-adjusted federal
funds rate --would have to be assessed in terms of its consistency
with the Committee's continuing objectives of fostering price
stability and promoting sustained economic growth.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they would vote for a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
They also favored a directive that did not include a presumption about
the likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, the Committee decided that slightly greater or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with more moderate growth in M2
and M3 over the months ahead.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
a strengthening in the expansion of economic activity
in the current quarter from the weak second-quarter
pace. Nonfarm payroll employment increased in June and
July after declining in May; the advance was held down
by continuing employment losses in manufacturing. The
civilian unemployment rate in July was at its second-quarter average of 5.7 percent. Industrial production
changed little in recent months after falling earlier
while capacity utilization was down somewhat further.
Total retail sales have risen appreciably on balance
since early spring, but they edged down in July,
reflecting weakness in motor vehicles. Housing starts
were up sharply in July after changing little in
previous months. Orders for nondefense capital goods
still point to considerable further expansion of
spending on business equipment over coming months;
nonresidential construction has continued to trend
appreciably higher. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade
in goods and services widened in the second quarter
from its average rate in the first quarter. After
increasing at elevated rates in the early part of the
year, consumer and producer prices have risen more
slowly in recent months. Advances in labor
compensation costs have remained subdued.
Short-term interest rates have posted mixed
changes since the Committee meeting on July 5-6, while
intermediate- and long-term rates have risen appreciably. In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies appreciated substantially over the
intermeeting period, with the gain occurring since the
beginning of August.
M2 and M3 continued to register sizable increases
in July and appeared to be expanding considerably
further in August. For the year through July, M2
expanded at a rate in the upper half of its range for
1995 and M3 grew at a rate above its upwardly revised
range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt has grown at a
rate in the upper half of its monitoring range in
recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with more moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, September 26, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 12:25 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007