FRB: FOMC Minutes--September 26, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of September 26, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,  on  Tuesday, September 26, 1995,  at  9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Slifman, and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin. Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper and Ms. Johnson, Assistant Directors,
Division of International Finance, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ramm,1Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Pianalto, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, Sniderman, and Ms.
Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Minneapolis,
Cleveland, and Atlanta respectively
Messrs. Cox, Hetzel, Judd, and McNees, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,
Richmond, San Francisco, and Boston
respectively
Ms. Meulendyke, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's economic
discussion.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on August 22, 1995, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets since the August meeting.
There were no transactions in these markets for the System Account
during this period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period August 22,
1995, through September 25, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity was expanding at a moderate rate in the current
quarter. Consumer spending appeared to be advancing somewhat further
after a sizable gain in the second quarter; housing demand had
strengthened in response to earlier reductions in mortgage rates; and
business investment remained on a solid uptrend. Although business
efforts to pare inventories apparently were still in progress, both
production and employment were advancing moderately. After having
increased at elevated rates in the early part of the year, consumer
and producer prices had risen more slowly in recent months.
Private nonfarm payroll employment increased considerably in
August after changing little in July. Much of the rise reflected a
pickup in hiring in the services industry, notably in business
services. Manufacturing payrolls were up modestly in August; the gain
followed substantial declines in the previous four months.
Construction employment changed little on balance over July and
August, with only small changes being posted each month. The civilian
unemployment rate edged down to 5.6 percent in August, remaining in
the narrow range that had prevailed since late 1994.
Industrial production jumped in August to a level moderately
above its average for the second quarter. Manufacturing output rose
sharply, posting its first increase since January; a surge in the
production of motor vehicles and parts accounted for some of the
advance, but the output of non-automotive consumer goods in August
more than reversed a sizable drop in July, and the production of
business equipment recorded another robust gain. A steep rise in
electricity generation associated with unusually hot weather over much
of the country more than offset a decline in mining production. Total
utilization of industrial capacity moved higher in August but remained
below the average rate for the first quarter.
Retail sales were up slightly on balance over July and August
after rising appreciably in the previous two months. Abstracting from
the volatile sales of motor vehicles during this period, spending on
goods changed little on balance over the two months, as increased
outlays for durable goods were offset by flagging purchases of
apparel. Spending on services rose in July (latest data available) owing in part to elevated demand for energy-related services during
that month's unseasonably warm weather. Housing market activity
increased further in July and August. Sales of both new and existing
homes in July (latest data) reached their highest levels in more than
a year, and housing starts edged up in August after a substantial rise
in July.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods fell appreciably in
July after having risen rapidly over the first half of the year, and
sales of heavy trucks also were down substantially. New orders for
nondefense capital goods declined steeply in July: however, the still-large backlog of outstanding orders, coupled with the favorable
effects on the user cost of capital of lower interest rates and higher
equity prices this year, pointed to further substantial expansion of
spending on business equipment over coming months. Nonresidential
construction posted another sizable gain in July. Outlays for office,
industrial, and institutional structures registered healthy increases,
but other commercial building activity was unchanged.
Business inventory accumulation slowed in June and July from
a very rapid rate earlier in the year: stockpiling continued at a
brisk pace in manufacturing and wholesale trade, but retail stocks
were drawn down. In manufacturing, stocks increased in July at about
the average rate seen in the second quarter; however, the stocks-to-shipments ratio rose somewhat, reflecting in part a reduction in
shipments that might have been exaggerated by difficulties of seasonal
adjustment. Wholesale inventories also advanced at about the second-quarter pace, and the inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector moved
up to the upper end of its range for recent years. At the retail
level, reduced stocks at automotive dealers accounted for much of the
July decline in inventories; the ratio of inventories to sales edged
lower but remained near the middle of the range for recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened slightly in July from its average rate in the second quarter.
The value of both exports and imports decreased. For exports, the
largest decline was in aircraft and automotive products. The decrease
in imports was concentrated in automotive products and gold.
Available indicators of economic activity suggested that expansion was
continuing in most of the major foreign industrial countries in the
third quarter and that the average rate of growth remained near the
subdued pace of the first half of the year.
As in other recent months, consumer prices rose more slowly
in August than in the early months of the year. Sizable declines in
energy prices were a contributing factor, but price increases also had
moderated for nonfood, non-energy items; the moderation largely
reflected a downturn in automobile finance charges and used-car prices
along with smaller increases in airline fares. For the twelve months
ending in August, nonfood, non-energy prices rose by the same amount
as in the year-earlier period. At the producer level, prices of
finished goods edged lower in August after being unchanged in July.
Although declines in prices of finished energy goods held down the
overall index in both months, prices of finished goods other than food
and energy rose more slowly than in the early months of the year; for
the twelve months ending in August, nonfood, non-energy prices of
finished goods increased slightly more than in the comparable year-earlier period.
At its meeting on August 22, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. The directive stated that in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with more moderate growth of M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing and the
federal funds rate generally were in line with expectations, with the
funds rate averaging close to 5-3/4 percent. Other market interest
rates fell appreciably over much of the period, though these declines
were partially reversed near the end of the period. Further evidence
of subdued price pressures, indications that the rebound in growth of
GDP would be modest, and increasing confidence that significant
reductions in federal deficits might be in train contributed to the
drop in rates. The lower interest rates, optimistic assessments of
corporate earnings, and the brisk pace of merger announcements and
share buybacks helped lift major indexes of equity prices to new
record levels during the period, though they ended the period below
those highs.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined over the
intermeeting period. The dollar moved higher over most of the period,
partly in response to monetary easing actions in Germany, which were
quickly followed by similar steps in other European countries, and in
Japan. The policy easing in Japan was accompanied, inter alia, by
statements by U.S. and Japanese officials that they would welcome a
weaker yen. The dollar reversed course late in the intermeeting
period, however, following the announcement of a new Japanese fiscal
package and emerging uncertainties about the prospects for European
monetary union. On balance over the period, the dollar moved lower
against most European currencies while appreciating significantly
further against the yen.
After further strong expansion in August, M2 and M3 appeared
to be growing at a somewhat more moderate rate in September. The
still-brisk demand for M2 assets was associated with the lower market
interest rates now prevailing and the related decline in the opportunity costs associated with holding these assets. The relatively
robust growth of M3 reflected inflows to institution-only money market
funds as well as bank acquisitions of wholesale funds to meet loan
demand. For the year through August, M2 expanded at a rate somewhat
below the upper end of its range for 1995 and M3 grew at a rate
appreciably above its range. Total domestic nonfinancial debt had
grown at a rate around the midpoint of its monitoring range in recent
months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth in economic activity over the forecast horizon would be higher
than the weak pace of the second quarter. The process of bringing
inventories into better alignment with sales was well under way, and
the favorable wealth and interest-cost effects of the extended rally
in the debt and equity markets would tend to support moderate
expansion of final sales. Consumer spending was expected to grow at a
pace generally in line with incomes; the favorable effects on spending
of higher prices for financial assets held by households would be
offset to a degree in this forecast by less robust labor market
conditions and the difficulties that growing numbers of households
would encounter in servicing their enlarged debts. Homebuilding was
expected to be somewhat stronger in response to the earlier decline in
mortgage rates and the related improvement in housing affordability.
In anticipation of slower growth of sales and profits, business
investment in new equipment and structures was projected to slow from
the very rapid pace of the past few years, although the lower cost of
capital and the ready availability of financing would help to sustain
appreciable expansion in such investment. Export growth would pick up
in response to some expected strengthening in the economies of major
trading partners. A great deal of uncertainty surrounded the fiscal
outlook, but the staff continued to build a considerable degree of
fiscal restraint into its forecast. In the staff's judgment, the
prospects for some further easing of pressures on labor and other
resources suggested that price inflation likely would not deviate
significantly from recent trends.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the information
available since the August meeting had tended to confirm earlier
indications of a pickup in the expansion after a period of sluggish
growth during the spring. The economy did not display uniform
strength across industries or regions, but it appeared on balance to
have considerable and desirable expansionary momentum. Growth at a
pace averaging close to, or perhaps slightly below, the economy's
potential was viewed as the most likely prospect for the year ahead.
The outlook for economic activity remained subject to a variety of
uncertainties, including the still unsettled course of the federal
budget, and many members saw the risks of a shortfall from expectations as slightly greater than those of significantly faster growth.
With regard to inflation, the slower increases in key measures of
consumer and producer prices since earlier in the year were a welcome
development, and a number of members commented that inflation was
likely to remain contained, given likely developments. Many expressed
concern, however, that significant further progress toward achieving
stable prices might not be made over the next year or two.
In keeping with indicators of nationwide economic performance, anecdotal and other reports on regional activity suggested
somewhat uneven business conditions in different parts of the country,
but collectively the reports pointed to moderate overall growth.
Business activity in most regions had tended to improve or to remain
firm during the summer months, though declining growth or very
sluggish activity characterized some areas. The level of business
confidence generally appeared to have stayed high, but several members
indicated that they sensed from their contacts that business
expectations were somewhat fragile and vulnerable to adverse
developments.
In their discussion of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members generally viewed comparatively moderate growth in
consumer spending as a likely prospect over the forecast period.
After recording sizable gains in late spring, retail sales had been
well maintained in recent months, with some strengthening in the motor
vehicles sector in August apparently carrying over to September.
Favorable factors in the outlook for consumer spending included the
increases that had occurred in the value of financial assets and the
demand for household appliances and other durables that was expected
to be generated by stronger housing activity. On the other hand,
overall gains in consumer spending were likely to be restrained by
cyclically waning pent-up demands for consumer durables, especially
motor vehicles; still widespread concerns about job security
associated with ongoing business restructuring and downsizing
activities; and higher consumer debt loads.
Housing demand was continuing to respond to more attractive
mortgage rates, as evidenced by nationwide data and anecdotal reports
from many parts of the country. Increases in construction activity
were lagging the improvement in housing demand and had been limited
thus far, but considerable strength in homebuilding activity could be
expected over the next several months. The extent of further lagged
responses to reduced mortgage rates could not be foreseen with any
degree of certainty, and in any event housing demand would depend on
broad economic developments such as trends in employment and income.
Housing activity appeared to have weakened over recent months in one
major market where economic conditions were described as relatively
sluggish. In many other areas, however, persons in the real estate
industry were reported to be optimistic about the outlook for housing.
Business fixed investment remained a strongly positive factor
in the economy and was expected to provide further impetus to growth
over the next several quarters. The contribution of this sector could
be expected to lessen, however, as capital spending was adjusted to
expectations of a maturing expansion characterized by the emergence of
slower growth in final demand and business profits. In particular,
the outsized growth in business spending for equipment did not appear
to be sustainable under foreseeable economic conditions.
Diminished growth in inventories still seemed to be retarding
the expansion in overall business activity, as evidenced in part by
continuing reports of efforts by various business firms to bring their
inventories into better balance with sales. Nonetheless, such
adjustments now appeared to have been largely completed, or were
expected to be completed over the months immediately ahead, so that
inventory investment could be expected to have little effect on the
course of the economy during 1996. It was noted, however, that
projections of inventory behavior were subject to a high degree of
uncertainty.
A number of members commented that fiscal policy developments
constituted a major uncertainty in the outlook for economic activity.
While measures incorporating substantial reductions in spending from
current trends were widely expected to be enacted into law, it was not
possible to predict the outcome of the continuing debate on the
federal budget in the Congress and the Administration. Further
complicating any efforts to assess the potential damping influence of
prospective fiscal policy were uncertainties regarding the time frame
during which the new expenditure and tax measures would be put in
place--including the extent to which they would be implemented over
the year ahead--and the effects of the new fiscal measures on economic
incentives and financial markets. Favorable business and financial
market reactions would tend to mitigate, at least for a time, the
restraining effects of fiscal measures on aggregate demand. On the
other hand, if the deficit reduction measures that eventually were
enacted were to fall substantially short of current expectations,
there would be adverse repercussions in financial markets and possibly
on business confidence.
The nation's trade deficit was expected to diminish somewhat
over the next several quarters and in the process to exert less
restraint on domestic economic activity. The better trade performance
was projected to result from a number of factors, including the
improved competitive position of U.S. producers and the lagged effects
of earlier declines in the value of the dollar in foreign exchange
markets. It also was associated with forecasts of somewhat stronger
growth in economic activity abroad than in the United States. While
there were continuing anecdotal reports of expanding export markets,
some members expressed reservations about the extent to which the
economies of major foreign trading partners would strengthen over the
forecast period and the related prospects for growth of foreign demand
for U.S. goods and services.
Views on the outlook for inflation centered on forecasts of
little change or some slight decline in the rate of increase in
consumer prices over the year ahead. The appreciable moderation in
inflation in recent months had checked the deteriorating trend that
seemed to be emerging during the early months of the year, but the
members generally believed that recent developments did not point to a
significant further decline in inflation. Pressures on producer
resources had eased since the early part of the year, but the labor
market remained tight and capacity utilization was still above its
historical average. In this connection, a few members commented that
current forecasts were subject to a range of error that included a
risk of some intensification of inflationary pressures.
One uncertainty bearing on the outlook for inflation was the
extent to which potentially greater pressures on labor costs would be
translated into higher prices. Increases in labor expenses had been
held down by markedly reduced advances in the costs of benefits,
notably medical benefits. The economies from the latter source might
well lessen over coming quarters as the most easily implemented
reductions in the costs of providing medical care were achieved.
Moreover, the rise in worker compensation had been unusually
restrained in recent years in relation to the strong demand for
workers, evidently reflecting the effects of worker concerns about job
security in a period of business restructurings and downsizings, but
continued strength in the demand for labor might be expected to induce
more rapid increases in labor compensation over time. Some members
commented, however, that the underlying factors affecting employment
costs were not likely to change greatly over the forecast period. In
addition, the prospect that intense competitive pressures would
persist in many markets under projected economic conditions suggested
that business firms would continue to find it very difficult to pass
on rising costs through higher prices. It also was possible that the
rates of capacity utilization and employment associated with a steady
rate of inflation had changed in the direction of providing the
economy greater leeway to operate at a somewhat higher level without
generating more inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members supported a proposal to maintain an
unchanged degree of pressure on reserve positions. The expansion
seemed for now to have a desirable and sustainable momentum that did
not call for any change in policy. Furthermore, the outlook remained
clouded by the uncertainties stemming from the ongoing federal budget
debate. In any event, the Committee would need to remain alert to a
broader range of developments that might warrant a policy change at
some point. In this connection, several members expressed the opinion
that policy might have to be eased eventually in light of the downside
risks that they saw in the economy and a current policy stance that
they viewed as slightly restrictive. However, the current performance
of the economy suggested that the timing of an easing action was not
an immediate concern. Other members who preferred an unchanged policy
placed more emphasis on current forecasts of little or no progress in
reducing inflation from recent levels. They thought it would be
premature to ease policy without greater assurance that inflation had
been contained in the current cyclical expansion and that prospects
for significant further progress toward the long-run objective of
price level stability had improved. Indeed, the direction of the next
policy move was not clear in the view of some members, and they
believed that any easing should await a firm indication that the
outlook for economic activity was becoming less favorable or that
inflation was decreasing more rapidly than expected.
With regard to possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, the members all endorsed a proposal to retain an
intermeeting instruction in the directive that did not incorporate any
bias concerning the direction of possible intermeeting policy changes.
At this juncture, there was no specific reason to anticipate
developments that would call for an adjustment to policy during the
weeks ahead. While a change in policy certainly could not be ruled
out, the reasons for the change likely would involve sensitive issues
that would warrant Committee consultation regardless of the
intermeeting instruction.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated a preference for a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that did not include a presumption about the likely direction of any
adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that slightly greater or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of the year at a pace near that
experienced in recent months.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until instructed otherwise by the Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following
domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity is expanding at a moderate rate
in the current quarter. Nonfarm payroll employment
increased considerably in August after essentially no
growth in July; the civilian unemployment rate edged
down to 5.6 percent in August. Industrial production
posted a large increase in August to a level moderately
above the average of the second quarter. Total nominal
retail sales rose slightly on balance over July and
August after registering appreciable gains in the prior
two months. Housing starts were up a little in August
after increasing sharply in July. Orders for nondefense capital goods have softened but still point to
substantial expansion of spending on business equipment
over coming months; nonresidential construction has
been strong of late. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade
in goods and services widened slightly in July from its
average rate in the second quarter. After increasing
at elevated rates in the early part of the year,
consumer and producer prices have risen more slowly in
recent months.
Market interest rates have fallen somewhat since
the Committee meeting on August 22. In foreign
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies has
declined over the intermeeting period, with most of the
decline occurring over the past several days.
M2 and M3 continued to register sizable increases
in August but growth of those aggregates appears to
have moderated somewhat in September. For the year
through August, M2 expanded at a rate somewhat below
the upper end of its range for 1995 and M3 grew at a
rate appreciably above its range. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has grown at a rate around the
midpoint of its monitoring range in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of
the year near the pace of recent months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
Discussion of Proposed Legislation
At this meeting, the Committee discussed a bill, titled the
"Economic Growth and Price Stability Act of 1995," that recently had
been introduced in the United States Senate. The bill would make
price stability the primary long-run policy goal of the Federal
Reserve and require the Federal Reserve to establish a numerical
definition of price stability and to implement a policy that would
effectively promote such stability over time. It would repeal the
Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the "Humphrey-Hawkins
Act") and certain related provisions in the Employment Act of 1946 and
the Congressional Budget Act of 1974. The Federal Reserve had not yet
been asked its views of the bill, but testimony was likely at some
point and a preliminary discussion would help to identify important
issues.
The members had not had time to review the bill in detail or
to consider fully all its implications. Nonetheless, their initial
reaction was favorable in regard to the overall thrust of the bill's
monetary policy provisions. These would make clear that price
stability was the primary long-run objective of monetary policy and
would restructure the monetary policy reporting requirements to permit
the Congress to carry out its oversight responsibilities more
effectively. Many members felt that in the context of seeking and
maintaining price stability, monetary policy should have the
flexibility to react to short-run fluctuations in output and
employment, and they believed the bill would be improved if its intent
in this regard were clarified. A few members expressed strong
reservations about the part of the bill that would delete the
employment objectives set forth in the Employment Act of 1946.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Wednesday. November 15, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 1:20 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007