FRB: FOMC Minutes--May 23, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting
of May 23, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 23, 1995, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum and
Mses. Tschinkel and White, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, Dallas,
Atlanta, and New York respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Mr. Altig, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Secretary's Note: Advice had been received that Ernest T.
Patrikis had been elected by the board of directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York as an alternate member of
the Federal Open Market Committee for the period June 1,
1995, through December 31, 1995, and that he had executed his
oath of office.
Program for Safeguarding FOMC Information
At this meeting the Committee amended its "Program for
Security of FOMC Information." The changes included an increase in
the number of staff at the Federal Reserve Banks who could be given
access to confidential Class I and Class II FOMC information. The
Committee also liberalized its rule relating to attendance at FOMC
meetings to allow First Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
to attend meetings on a rotating basis. Other changes of a technical
or updating nature also were made to the Program. The Committee's
brief discussion of this organizational matter was not recorded in
keeping with the decision made at the meeting on January 31 February
1, 1995 normally not to record discussions unrelated to
monetary policy.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on March 28, 1995, were approved.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System foreign
currency transactions during the period March 28, 1995 through May 22,
1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period March 28,
1995, through May 22, 1995. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
these transactions.
The Manager requested a temporary increase of $2 billion, to
$10 billion, in the limit on intermeeting changes in outright System
Account holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities. He
advised the Committee that the current leeway of $8 billion might not
be sufficient to accommodate the potentially large need for additional
reserves over the intermeeting period to meet an anticipated seasonal
rise in the domestic demand for currency as well as continued currency
outflows to foreign countries. By unanimous vote, the Committee
amended paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market
Operations to raise the limit to $10 billion for the intermeeting
period ending with the close of business on July 5, 1995.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
expansion of economic activity had slowed considerably further and
that rates of resource utilization had declined. Although business
investment in equipment and structures had remained strong, overall
final sales had expanded less rapidly and inventories had continued to
build. Manufacturing output appeared to be down appreciably, in large
measure reflecting cutbacks in motor vehicle production, and the slump
in housing starts since the turn of the year was depressing
construction activity. Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices
had increased a little faster thus far this year, while advances in
labor compensation costs had remained subdued.
Nonfarm payroll employment posted reduced gains in the first
quarter and changed little in April; special factors and seasonal
adjustment difficulties may have depressed reported job growth in
April. Hiring in service-producing industries was down sharply from
the pace in previous months, with jobs in personnel supply services
falling for a second consecutive month after three years of rapid
growth. Employment in manufacturing decreased further, and the number
of construction jobs contracted after a sizable weather-related surge
in March. Initial claims for unemployment insurance increased
considerably in recent weeks, and the civilian unemployment rate rose
to 5.8 percent in April.
Industrial production fell further in April, with
manufacturing registering a substantial decline. The drop in
industrial output largely reflected a cutback in the production of
motor vehicles and parts, but declines in output also were evident in
other cyclically sensitive sectors, such as non-auto consumer durables
and construction supplies. Production of business equipment other
than motor vehicles registered a small gain. Total utilization of
industrial capacity continued to decline in April; however, operating
rates in manufacturing remained at relatively high levels.
Retail sales were down in April after having risen moderately
over the first quarter; a steep drop in sales of motor vehicles
accounted for all of the April decline. Total expenditures on other
types of goods edged higher in April, even though sales of apparel,
furniture, and home appliances were noticeably weaker. Housing starts
changed little in April after having declined sharply in the first
quarter, and the inventory of new homes for sale remained relatively
large. On the other hand, sales of both new and existing homes rose
moderately in March after sizable declines in February, and recent
surveys indicated some improvement in attitudes toward homebuying.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods remained on a strong
uptrend in March, with outlays for office and computing equipment
registering another sharp increase. Manufacturers of heavy trucks
continued to operate at capacity to meet demand; by contrast, business
expenditures for motor vehicles reportedly plunged in April. Data on
orders for nondefense capital goods pointed to further strong
expansion of spending on business equipment in the months ahead,
although gains appeared likely to be smaller than those of the past
several quarters. Nonresidential construction continued to rise in
March, and data on permits for new construction suggested that
building activity would advance further in coming months, though
perhaps at a somewhat slower rate.
Business inventories surged again in March, and the pace of
inventory accumulation over the first quarter was substantially higher
than the average rate for the second half of 1994. Much of the first-quarter increase in stocks reflected a buildup in inventories of motor
vehicles at the wholesale and retail levels. Non-auto stocks also
increased at a brisk pace in the first quarter, accompanied by the
emergence of scattered signs of inventory imbalances in furniture,
appliances, and apparel at the retail level and in construction
supplies at earlier stages of production and distribution. The stock-to-sales ratio in manufacturing was unchanged in March from the very
low fourth-quarter level. At the wholesale level, the ratio of
inventories to sales rose in March but remained within the range of
the last several years. Inventory accumulation in the retail sector
slowed in March despite a further rise in inventories of motor
vehicles. For the retail sector as a whole, the inventory-to-sales
ratio increased in March to the top end of its range of the last two
years; when the motor vehicle components of stocks and sales are
excluded, however, the ratio was near the middle of its range in
recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services was
little changed in March from the February level and remained
substantially narrower than in January. On a quarterly average basis,
the trade deficit widened in the first quarter as growth in the value
of exports slowed while the expansion in the value of imports
continued unabated. A drop in shipments to Mexico was among the
factors holding down export growth in March. Data available for the
first quarter indicated that economic recovery continued in the major
foreign industrial countries as a group but that the pace varied
significantly across countries. There were signs of sustained growth
in the United Kingdom, slower growth in Canada, renewed recovery in
Japan, and weakness in France and Italy.
Inflation had picked up somewhat in the early months of 1995.
At the consumer level, prices rose a little more rapidly in the first
quarter, despite unchanged food prices and lower energy prices. In
April, a surge in food prices and a rebound in energy prices
contributed to a further step-up in consumer inflation. At the
producer level, prices of finished goods followed a roughly similar
pattern, increasing at a slightly faster pace in the first quarter and
then more briskly in April. The April rise partly reflected a sharp
jump in the prices of finished energy goods, but prices of non-energy,
nonfood items also advanced at a somewhat faster rate. At earlier
stages of production, prices of intermediate materials continued to
increase rapidly in April. By contrast, trends in labor compensation
costs remained subdued. Gains in hourly compensation of private
industry workers slowed further in the first quarter of 1995, with a
continuing moderation in the cost of benefits accounting for all of
the deceleration in compensation.
At its meeting on March 28, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions but that included a bias toward the possible
firming of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, the directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would be acceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve
conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in the broader monetary aggregates
over coming months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing trended higher over the
period, reflecting a rising need for seasonal credit at the beginning
of the planting season, while the federal funds rate continued to
average close to 6 percent.
Most market interest rates moved lower over the intermeeting
period in reaction to weaker-than-expected incoming economic data,
which market participants interpreted as signaling a considerable
slowing of the economic expansion and a growing likelihood that the
next monetary policy move would be in an easing direction. Market
assessments that the prospects for major reductions in budget deficits
were improving also seemed to contribute to the drop in rates. In
this environment, the release of data indicating large increases in
consumer and producer prices for April only temporarily interrupted
the decline in rates. Intermediate- and long-term interest rates
posted the largest declines over the intermeeting period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined substantially
further over the first half of the intermeeting period. In mid-April,
the dollar reached a record low against the Japanese yen and
approached a record low against the German mark. The dollar's
weakness appeared to have been related in part to further indications
of softening economic activity and related declines in interest rates
in the United States and to increasing trade tensions with Japan.
Late in the period, the dollar reversed its course and moved up
sharply against the yen and the mark; monetary easing abroad,
improving prospects for reductions in the U.S. budget deficit, and
stabilizing financial conditions in Mexico appeared to contribute to
the turnaround. The dollar ended the intermeeting period higher on
balance against the other G-10 currencies.
The growth of M2 picked up further in April, reflecting in
part the need for additional liquid balances to make unusually heavy
final tax payments; these payments resulted from the stronger economy
in 1994 and from new tax regulations allowing individuals to delay a
larger portion of their tax payments until April. The expansion of M2
also appeared to be boosted by the increased relative attractiveness
of small time deposits and money market funds following declines in
market interest rates. For the year through April, M2 grew at a rate
in the lower half of its range for 1995 while M3 expanded at a rate
somewhat above its range. The persisting strength of M3 in April
largely reflected the needs of commercial banks to fund continuing
heavy credit demands by households and businesses. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt had grown at a rate a little above the midpoint of
its monitoring range in recent months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity was slowing somewhat more than previously
anticipated, with the recent plunge in motor vehicle sales prompting a
deeper-than-expected reduction in the production of cars and light
trucks. Economic expansion would average less than the rate of
increase in the economy's potential output for a number of months, but
the favorable wealth and interest-cost effects of the extended rally
that had occurred in stock and bond markets were expected to provide
underlying support for aggregate demand later in the year and in 1996.
The forecast continued to anticipate that consumer spending would be
restrained by smaller gains in real incomes and the satisfaction of
pent-up demands for motor vehicles and other durable goods. Business
outlays for new equipment were expected to decelerate substantially in
response to the slower growth of sales and profits. Homebuilding was
projected to pick up somewhat in lagged response to the recent decline
in mortgage rates. Developments in Mexico might depress U.S. exports
further, but mainly in the very near term given the size of the
adjustments already evident in the Mexican current account. With this
influence waning, sustained growth in the economies of other U.S.
trading partners was expected to boost export demand. Considerable
uncertainty continued to surround the fiscal outlook, but the forecast
maintained the greater degree of fiscal restraint that had been
assumed since early in the year. In the staff's judgment, the
prospects for some easing of pressures on resources suggested that
price inflation would likely moderate from its recently higher level.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic conditions, members reported on statistical and anecdotal
indications of further slowing in the expansion of economic activity
and some related easing of pressures on labor and other producer
resources. A number commented that they anticipated a relatively
sluggish economic performance over coming months as production was cut
back to bring inventories into better balance with sales. However,
underlying demand was likely to remain sufficiently robust, especially
in light of developments in financial markets, to avert a cumulative
decline in business activity and, indeed, to return economic growth to
a pace broadly in line with potential. Members cited in particular
the strength in business fixed investment and the potential for
improvement in housing activity and the trade balance as factors that
should help to sustain the expansion. Nonetheless, the longer-run
outlook remained subject to considerable uncertainty, especially given
the undecided course of fiscal policy and the ongoing inventory
correction; the ultimate extent of that correction and its effects on
overall economic performance were subject to a cyclical dynamic whose
outcome could not be predicted with confidence. A worsening in key
measures of inflation, including the consumer price index and the
producer price index for finished goods, was a disappointing--if not
unexpected--development. A number of members expressed concern that
the risks were still tilted in the direction of some further step-up
in inflation; however, others were more inclined to the view that
inflation was not likely to rise much further in a climate of moderate
growth in demand, intense competitive pressures in many markets, and
relatively subdued increases in labor costs.
Members commented that a reduction in the rate of inventory
investment was likely to be the dominant influence on the near-term
performance of the economy. Some also saw a risk that a significantly
greater-than-expected softening in inventory accumulation might have
adverse, and possibly cumulative, effects of a longer-term nature on
production and incomes and thus on consumer and business spending.
With the exception of the motor vehicle industry, however, current
inventory levels generally were quite low in relation to sales and
potential inventory adjustments were likely to be limited in size.
Once further inventory adjustments were completed, the rate of
accumulation could be expected to remain well below the unsustainable
pace experienced over the past year and perhaps settle into a pattern
where changes in inventories became a relatively neutral factor in the
ongoing economic expansion.
In their comments about broad factors underlying the economic
outlook, members reported that current business and consumer sentiment
remained generally favorable across the nation. Despite the softening
demand in some markets or industries, notably that for motor vehicles,
business contacts continued to express optimism about the outlook for
their firms, though some of their comments were tempered by greater
caution than had been observed earlier. A number of members referred
to the general financial climate as an important element in the
outlook for sustained economic expansion. They noted that the decline
in interest rates had favorable implications for demand in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. The rise in equity prices also was
contributing to reductions in the cost of capital to businesses, and
banks continued to ease terms and standards on loans. In addition,
the rise in stock and bond prices had increased the net worth of many
households, though some concern was expressed about the sustainability
of the stock market's strong performance.
With regard to developments in key sectors of the economy,
the slowdown in the growth of consumer spending was somewhat more
pronounced than anticipated earlier. Some rebound in consumer demand
seemed likely and already appeared to be occurring in the motor
vehicle industry in May. Underlying conditions for further growth in
consumer spending were viewed as relatively favorable; these
conditions included strengthened balance sheets stemming from
developments in financial markets, continued growth of incomes, and
aggressive extensions of consumer credit by a number of lenders. In
at least one view, however, consumer credit had been growing at a pace
that could not be sustained and the inevitable correction could
coincide with and exacerbate emerging weakness in consumer demand. On
balance, growth in personal consumption expenditures was seen as
likely to continue over coming quarters but at a reduced pace given
the apparent satisfaction of a large portion of earlier pent-up
demands for consumer durables and some expected moderation in the
growth of jobs and incomes.
Business investment remained on a strong uptrend as numerous
firms continued to respond to the need to relieve pressures on
existing capacity and to increase operating efficiencies in the face
of vigorous competition. Rapid growth in profits and a ready
availability of financing also were cited as factors tending to
support business investment spending. The increase in such spending
was likely to moderate over the projection horizon, though to a still
brisk pace, as declining growth in demand and easing pressures on
capacity induced growing caution in business investment decisions.
Indeed, the growth in expenditures for producer durable equipment
already appeared to be moderating from an extremely rapid pace, though
nonresidential construction was reported to be posting solid gains in
several parts of the country.
Members also expected some strengthening in residential
construction following the large declines in mortgage interest rates
that had occurred since late 1994. Housing construction had trended
lower since the start of the year, but several indicators pointed to a
revival. The latter included surveys showing improving homebuyer
attitudes and builder assessments of the outlook for new home sales,
and rising applications to purchase homes. Sizable inventories of
unsold new homes would probably continue to damp construction activity
for some months, but contacts in the real estate and mortgage finance
industries were more optimistic about the outlook for housing.
The foreign trade sector likewise was expected to make an
appreciable contribution to the expansion of economic activity in
coming quarters. The robust uptrend in U.S. exports during 1994 had
been slowed to a considerable extent thus far this year by the sharp
adjustment in trade with Mexico, but in the view of several members
that adjustment might now be largely completed. In that event, gains
in exports could be expected to resume at a fairly brisk pace despite
indications of reduced economic growth in some key foreign countries.
This assessment was supported by anecdotal reports of rising foreign
demand for some U.S. products in the context of the generally improved
international competitive position of the United States.
Concurrently, growth in imports would tend to be held down by the
projected slowing in the expansion of domestic demand. On the
negative side, some members referred to the possibility that a longer
period might be needed to resolve the difficulties being experienced
by Mexico, and several expressed particular concern about the
potential for relatively severe disruptions to trade if current
negotiations with Japan were not successfully concluded.
Fiscal policy was seen as a major uncertainty in the economic
outlook. Federal purchases of goods and services were expected to
continue trending lower and the growth of transfer payments was likely
to be trimmed, but the extent and timing of fiscal restraint could not
be determined while federal deficit reduction continued to be debated
in the Congress. In the view of at least some members, however, a
larger fiscal contraction than was commonly expected might well
materialize, perhaps starting later this year. The course of fiscal
legislation undoubtedly would continue to affect financial markets
and, in the opinion of some members, would need to be taken into
account in the formulation of monetary policy.
Concerning inflation, several members commented that the rise
in consumer prices and some other broad measures of inflation in
recent months appeared to reflect cyclical developments relating to
the tightening of resource and product markets over the past year,
including the partial pass-through of sizable increases in prices at
earlier stages of production. In addition, higher import prices
might have been playing a role. A number of members expressed concern
that, with the economy already producing at or even slightly above its
sustainable potential, inflation pressures were likely to intensify if
the current pause in the expansion were to be followed by a period of
above-average growth. On the other hand, members who saw the odds as
pointing to a more moderate rebound after a period of relatively
sluggish economic performance were inclined to the view that an upward
trend in inflation was likely to be averted. In addition, the ongoing
competitive pressures in many markets, the restraint in compensation
increases, and the continuing efforts to cut production costs would
help to contain pressures on prices over time.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members endorsed a proposal to maintain the
current stance of policy. The higher interest rates of 1994 clearly
had damped demand, but since year-end intermediate- and long-term
market rates had declined, stock market prices had risen, bank lending
terms had continued to ease, and the dollar had fallen against the
currencies of many major industrial countries. On balance, it
appeared that the current configuration of financial market conditions
and degree of monetary restraint was likely to be consistent with
moderate expansion in nominal GDP and prices following a period of
some weakness in the economy as inventory imbalances were corrected.
The risks of a different outcome, in either direction, seemed to be
reasonably balanced. In the circumstances, because the dimensions of
the near-term deceleration and the potential strength of underlying
demand remained uncertain, the members concluded that it was desirable
to monitor developments carefully and wait for additional information
before deciding on the next policy move.
With regard to the possible need to adjust policy during the
intermeeting period, all the members were in favor of shifting
to an unbiased instruction that did not incorporate any presumption
with regard to the direction of potential intermeeting changes. The
members agreed that no compelling case could be made at this point for
potential adjustments to policy in either direction during the period
ahead, and retaining a bias in the directive would give a misleading
indication of the Committee's current intentions for the period. One
member expressed the view that the costs of being wrong currently
seemed higher in the direction of accommodating too much inflation,
though signs of a possible cumulative deterioration in economic
activity could not be ignored should they materialize. Another
member, who saw the longer-term risks to the economy as tilted to the
downside of current projections, indicated that while the recent
performance of the economy might argue for some easing of monetary
policy, a steady policy course without any bias in the intermeeting
instruction was appropriate for now in light of the generally
accomodative financial and banking markets.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members supported a directive that called for maintaining the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions and that did not include a
presumption about the likely direction of any adjustments to policy
during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
somewhat greater or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting were expected to be consistent with
moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the months ahead.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the expansion of economic activity has slowed
considerably further. In April, nonfarm payroll
employment was about unchanged after posting reduced
gains in the first quarter, and the civilian unemployment rate rose to 5.8 percent. Industrial production
fell in April, largely reflecting a cutback in the
production of motor vehicles, and capacity utilization
rates declined somewhat. Reflecting markedly weaker
demand for motor vehicles, total retail sales were down
in April after rising moderately over the first
quarter. Housing starts were unchanged in April after
declining sharply in the first quarter. Orders for
nondefense capital goods point to further strong
expansion of spending on business equipment; nonresidential construction has continued to trend
appreciably higher. The nominal deficit on U.S. trade
in goods and services widened in the first quarter from
its average rate in the fourth quarter. Broad indexes
of consumer and producer prices have increased faster
on average thus far this year, while advances in labor
compensation costs have remained subdued.
Intermediate- and long-term interest rates have
declined considerably further since the Committee
meeting on March 28, while short-term rates have
registered small decreases. In foreign exchange
markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in
terms of the other G-10 currencies, after falling to
low levels, rose on balance over the intermeeting
period.
M2 and M3 strengthened in March and April. For
the year through April, M2 expanded at a rate in the
lower half of its range for 1995 and M3 grew at a rate
somewhat above its range. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt has grown at a rate a bit above the midpoint of
its monitoring range in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting on January 31-February 1 established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee
anticipated that money growth within these ranges would
be consistent with its broad policy objectives. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered to 3 to 7 percent for the
year. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Wednesday-Thursday, July 5-6, 1995.
The meeting adjourned at 12:15 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007