FRB: FOMC Minutes--December 19, 1995
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of December 19, 1995
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 19, 1995, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Melzer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus and Parry, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and San
Francisco, respectively
Mr. Guynn, President elect, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lindsey,
Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, Slifman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Ramm,1 Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum, and
Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Cleveland,
respectively
Ms. Rosenbaum, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Ms. Perelmuter, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Evans, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago
1. Did not attend portion of meeting covering the monetary policy
discussion.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on November 15, 1995, were approved.
The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,
conducted by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and
Payment Systems as of the close of business on September 29, 1995, was
accepted.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets during the period November
15, 1995, through December 18, 1995. There were no System open market
transactions in foreign currencies during this period, and thus no
vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period
November 15, 1995, through December 18, 1995. By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
By unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the renewal
until December 13, 1996, of the System's regular reciprocal currency
("swap") arrangement of $3 billion with the Bank of Mexico and the
System's participation in the North American Framework Agreement
with the monetary authorities of Canada and Mexico. Both were due to
terminate on January 31, 1996. The additional temporary $3 billion
swap arrangement with the Bank of Mexico, approved by the Committee on
February 1, 1995, would lapse on January 31, 1996, in line with its
original terms.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information available at this meeting suggested that the
expansion of economic activity had slowed substantially after a strong
gain in such activity during the third quarter. Data on employment
and aggregate hours worked since late summer were consistent with
moderate further increases in overall economic activity. Industrial
production had changed little on balance after a sizable rise in the
third quarter. On the spending side, robust advances in business
fixed investment continued to provide considerable impetus to the
economy. The available information on consumer expenditures pointed
to somewhat reduced gains in recent months, and indicators of housing
demand suggested on balance that activity in housing markets had
tended to stabilize after several months of considerable
strengthening. Consumer prices had risen relatively slowly in recent
months, while increases in labor compensation had remained
comparatively subdued.
Nonfarm payroll employment continued to grow at a pace
roughly in line with the expansion of the labor force in recent
months, with gains concentrated in the private service-producing
sectors. The published information indicated some further declines in
factory and government jobs in October and November. Although
aggregate hours of private production workers fell in November, they
remained appreciably above their average level in the third quarter.
The unemployment rate edged up to 5.6 percent in November, equaling
its average for the third quarter.
Industrial production was little changed on balance over
October and November after a sizable increase in the third quarter. A
decline in October was largely accounted for by a strike at a major
aircraft manufacturer and that strike, very recently settled, had also
exerted a slightly depressing effect on production in November.
Production of motor vehicles and parts also fell, on net, in October
and November. Further growth outside the aircraft and motor vehicle
industries was paced by continuing strength in the production of
business equipment. Outside manufacturing, the output of utilities
was boosted in November by demand associated with unusually cold
weather.
Business fixed investment was continuing to grow at a rapid
pace, with much of the strength stemming from the persisting and
vigorous expansion in spending for office and computing equipment.
However, the recent gains in total business investment had moderated
from the extraordinary pace evident in 1994 and early 1995, and they
also were less widespread among major categories of business equipment
than they had been earlier. New orders for nondefense capital goods
other than computers and aircraft had leveled out, although shipments
were being maintained at high levels by still-large backlogs of
unfilled orders. Producers of aircraft had received very sizable new
orders recently, but shipments of completed aircraft had been held
back in recent months by the strike at a major firm. Outlays for
nonresidential construction were continuing to advance briskly, with
construction of commercial structures posting sizable increases
recently. Overall drilling and mining activity also had continued to
move higher, led by increased exploration for natural gas.
Total nominal retail sales rose considerably in November,
more than offsetting a drop in October; over the two months, retail
sales were advancing at a slower pace than the average rate in the
second and third quarters. Much of the November increase reflected
strong gains in sales of consumer durables, including improved sales
of motor vehicles. In the nondurables sector, a sizable rise in
November about reversed a decline in October. Recent surveys of
consumer sentiment pointed to generally positive attitudes.
After having recorded robust advances during the third
quarter, most indicators of housing activity suggested little further
change more recently. However, considerable strength in mortgage
applications associated with lower mortgage rates, together with
survey indications of an upturn in house-buying intentions, pointed to
strengthening housing construction over coming months. Housing starts
were down in October, the latest month for which these data were
available, after a large increase in the third quarter.
Data for October indicated a sizable accumulation of business
inventories. In manufacturing, stocks grew at a rate only moderately
below the brisk pace in the third quarter, and the rise continued to
be concentrated in the capital goods industries. The aggregate ratio
of inventories to sales in manufacturing was somewhat above the lows
in late 1994 and early 1995. In the wholesale sector, a buildup in
stocks of capital equipment accounted for the bulk of the accumulation
in October, and the inventory-to-sales ratio in this sector remained
on an uptrend. A sharp rise in retail inventories in October was led
by a large increase in stocks at auto dealers and at general
merchandise and apparel outlets. The inventory-to-sales ratio for the
retail sector as a whole was at its high for the year, but signs of
overstocking, apart from motor vehicles, were limited.
After having strengthened appreciably in the third quarter,
federal government purchases were now lagging and exerting some
retarding effect on overall economic activity. The decline in federal
purchases in part represented the transitory effects of government
shutdowns and the restraining effects of spending cuts imposed by
continuing resolutions and by curtailed appropriations in bills that
already had been enacted into law. At the state and local government
levels, however, available data pointed to continued, relatively
strong growth in purchases.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
changed little in September (latest data available). Measured on a
quarterly average basis, however, the deficit declined substantially
in the third quarter, with the reduction about equally divided between
a rise in the value of exports and a drop in the value of imports.
Increases in exports were widespread among the major categories of
trade, while reductions in imports were concentrated in categories in
which there had been large gains in the second quarter. Available
data pointed to subdued growth in most of the major foreign industrial
countries in the second half of 1995.
Consumer prices had risen more slowly on balance in recent
months than they had during the first half of the year. In November,
the total index for consumer prices was unchanged, and consumer prices
excluding food and energy were up only slightly. In contrast,
producer prices of finished goods registered a relatively large
increase in November, and the component of this index excluding food
and energy posted its largest rise since January. At the same time,
prices of intermediate materials declined a bit further in November.
According to recent survey results, consumers now expected less
inflation over the year ahead and also over the next five to ten
years. The available data on wages and worker benefits continued on
balance to display a relatively subdued trend of increases in labor
compensation.
At its meeting on November 15, 1995, the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting
period. The directive stated that in the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. The federal funds rate averaged a bit above the
expected rate of 5-3/4 percent over the period. The bunching of
settlements of several Treasury issues that had resulted from debt
ceiling disruptions and the mid-December corporate tax date were among
the factors exerting pressure on the funds rate. Most other short-term interest rates fell slightly and longer-term interest rates
extended earlier declines during the intermeeting period. Market
expectations of some easing of monetary policy appeared to be
reinforced by market interpretations of the incoming information as
further evidence that overall demand would be restrained and that the
risks of a pickup in inflationary pressures had diminished. Over the
intermeeting interval, major indexes of stock prices continued to move
higher in concert with the rise in bond prices.
The sluggish performance of the broad monetary aggregates
since August continued in November. Despite the persistence of low
opportunity costs associated with holding M2 assets, M2 growth was
relatively modest in November after a slight contraction in October.
M3 growth slowed further in November, partly as a result of a shift of
funding by borrowers toward capital market instruments to take
advantage of lower long-term market rates. Nonetheless, because of
robust expansion earlier in the year, M2 remained in the upper half of
its 1995 range through November and M3 expanded at a rate at the upper
end of its range. Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had
slowed somewhat in recent months, reflecting reduced expansion of both
private and federal borrowing, and for 1995 to date, this debt measure
had grown at a rate around the midpoint of its monitoring range.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose slightly further on
balance over the intermeeting period. Declining interest rates in
several major foreign industrial countries, evidently induced by
disappointing economic growth in those countries, appeared to have a
firming effect on the dollar in relation to European currencies. The
dollar changed little against the Japanese yen over the period after a
sharp advance earlier. The Mexican peso appreciated a bit in relation
to the dollar over the period.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the growth of economic activity would slow substantially from the very
strong pace now indicated for the third quarter. Although this
forecast did not differ significantly from that prepared for the
November meeting, less growth than expected earlier seemed likely in
the current quarter. Over the forecast horizon, however, the economy
was still projected to expand at a pace that would keep activity close
to the economy's potential. The forecast anticipated that the
expansion in consumer spending would slow a bit in response to
diminished gains in disposable income associated with less-rapid
advances in spending in other sectors of the economy. The rise that
had occurred in the value of financial assets held by households would
be a positive factor helping to support consumer spending but one that
would be offset to a degree by the difficulties of an increasing
number of households in servicing their growing debts. The greater
affordability of housing stemming from the earlier decline in mortgage
rates was projected to help sustain homebuilding activity at a
relatively high level. In the context of reduced growth in sales and
profits, business investment in new equipment and structures was
projected to increase more moderately after several years of rapid
advance. Although indications of excess inventories were limited,
slower growth in sales and ongoing efforts to reduce inventory costs
were projected to lead to smaller increases in stocks over the
projection period. Exports were expected to be bolstered to some
extent by the projected improvement in the economies of major trading
partners. Although a great deal of uncertainty still surrounded the
fiscal outlook, the forecast continued to incorporate an appreciable
degree of fiscal restraint. Given the projected outlook, rates of
utilization of labor and capital resources would remain relatively
high, and the underlying trend of price inflation was seen as unlikely
to change significantly over the projection period.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
developments, members noted that the information that had become
available since the November meeting tended to confirm earlier
indications that the economic expansion had slowed appreciably from
the brisk pace of the summer months. The members generally agreed
that the most likely course for the economy remained one of moderate
growth. Expansion at or near potential was seen as the most probable
outcome, associated at least in part with the favorable effects on
business and consumer spending of lower interest rates, higher equity
prices, and an ample availability of credit. However, a number of
members expressed concern that the strength of final demands would not
be sufficient to support growth near the economy's potential, absent a
policy adjustment. One factor that might retard growth was a higher
level of real short-term interest rates owing to the favorable
performance of inflation. Members noted that consumer price increases
had remained relatively subdued and below expectations in recent
months, despite the generally high levels of utilization of both labor
and capital resources that had prevailed through much of the year.
Several commented that the effects of new technologies, gains in
productivity, global competitive pressures on businesses, and
restraint in wage setting might imply that inflation would edge down
further. Others expressed concern that the prospects for further
reductions in inflation seemed quite limited in the context of
projected high levels of resource use, including tight labor markets
in many parts of the country.
In the Committee's discussion of regional developments,
members reported that anecdotal and other information pertaining to
regional activity suggested that the moderation in nationwide economic
growth was evident across most of the nation, with the rate of
expansion ranging from slow to moderate in different areas of the
country. Overall levels of business activity continued to vary
widely, from relatively weak in some areas to comparatively robust in
others. Conditions also were uneven across industries, particularly
in manufacturing, where flagging auto sales and some further inventory
accumulation contrasted sharply with brisk demand for a range of
producers durable goods, notably office and computing equipment, and
building products. Despite indications that job growth had been
relatively limited, labor markets remained tight in many parts of the
country and there were more, albeit still limited, reports of rising
wage pressures; in some areas, however, labor market conditions
appeared to have eased somewhat recently.
In their discussion of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members commented that the data and the anecdotal information
on consumer spending had been mixed. For the holiday season, reports
indicated that retail sales had been disappointing thus far, though
sales appeared to be holding up relatively well in some sections of
the country and for higher-priced luxury items more generally.
Consumers had remained very cautious despite considerable promotional
sales activity, perhaps anticipating even more aggressive markdowns of
prices as the shopping season neared its end. Members noted that the
reluctance of consumers also might be reflecting a sense of continued
job insecurity in an environment of ongoing business restructuring and
downsizing, higher debt service burdens and rising delinquency rates,
and the satisfaction of pent-up demand for durable goods. While these
factors might be exerting an inhibiting influence on consumers, the
members generally viewed moderate growth in consumer spending as a
reasonable expectation in the context of further projected expansion
in disposable incomes. The increase in household wealth associated
with the strong performance of the bond and stock markets might tend
to boost consumer spending relative to disposable incomes, although
one member suggested that the highly concentrated nature of wealth
holdings might limit any positive effect on aggregate consumption.
With regard to housing, members took note of the recent declines in
single-family housing starts and sales after a strong third quarter.
They remarked, however, that some of their contacts were anticipating
that the declines in mortgage interest rates over recent months to
their current relatively low levels would foster a wave of mortgage
refinancing and a pickup in housing demand in the spring.
Business fixed investment was expected to grow at a pace
appreciably less than that observed in recent years but nonetheless to
continue supplying considerable impetus to the expansion. Strong
profits and cash flows, along with the ample availability of financing
on attractive terms, were favorable factors in the outlook; on the
other hand, a weakening trend in final demand, notably in consumer
outlays, likely would have a negative effect on business capital
spending. Several members reported that commercial and other
nonresidential construction activity remained brisk in various regions
around the nation. A number of members commented on business
inventory developments. Overall inventories of motor vehicles were on
the high side, and inventory accumulation more generally appeared to
be running somewhat ahead of sales. There were no indications that
serious overhangs were emerging, but there were risks that efforts to
hold down stocks would damp production over the near term.
The outlook for fiscal policy continued to be clouded by the
uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the debate between the Congress
and the Administration. The members anticipated that the result of
the debate would be considerable fiscal restraint, but the timing of
tax and spending initiatives aimed at an eventual balancing of the
budget and the extent of the fiscal contraction over time could not be
forecast with any precision. In the interim, much of the federal
government was closed, and while federal workers were expected to
get paid eventually, their spending and that of federal contractors
might be damped until the situation was resolved. The members
believed, however, that in light of the plans being put forward, the
fiscal drag imposed by likely federal budget developments would not be
unusually large over the next few years.
In reviewing the outlook for inflation, members referred to
the generally favorable price and cost experience of recent months.
Several pointed to subdued increases in labor compensation and to
anecdotal indications that upward pressures on wages and benefits
remained scattered despite tightness in many labor markets. In this
environment, and with the economy expected to expand at a
comparatively moderate pace over the forecast period, many members
anticipated that inflation would remain relatively stable despite
continuing high levels of resource utilization, and some believed that
it might record a somewhat improved performance. One argument
advanced in support of a possibly better performance was that the
recent experience, which had been more favorable than expected given
capacity utilization levels, was perhaps suggestive of the effects of
rapid technological improvements on productivity, the enhanced
efficiencies from greater economic specialization around the world,
and the influence of heightened job insecurity on wages and prices.
Another was the possible effect on future wage demands of the lower
inflation expectations that now prevailed. Although no member saw
greater inflation as having a high probability, several did refer to
risks in that direction, including the possibility of greater
pressures on resources stemming from faster than currently anticipated
economic growth.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members either favored or could accept a slight
easing in the degree of pressure on reserve positions. One argument
cited in favor of some easing was that the policy stance, as indexed
by the prevailing real federal funds rate, was becoming somewhat
restrictive as inflation and inflationary expectations moderated,
leaving real short-term rates higher than anticipated. In addition,
with markets expecting a reduction in the federal funds rate in coming
months, an unchanged policy was likely to lead to a backup in
intermediate- and long-term rates. Although there was no sign that a
cumulative deterioration in economic performance was about to get
under way, the downside risks to the expansion appeared to have
increased and a modest easing would better position policy to guard
against the possibility that over the longer term the expansion would
begin to fall short of the economy's potential, especially with fiscal
policy likely to be at least moderately restrictive. In any case, the
recent slowing of the economic expansion, combined with the wage and
price restraint evident at current levels of resource utilization and
continuing business efforts to expand capacity, suggested that there
was little risk of a pickup in inflation. Indeed, the favorable
inflation experience over the last half year raised the possibility of
continued modest price improvement.
A number of members, though willing to accept a slight
easing, preferred an unchanged policy stance. While inflation had
slowed from the elevated pace observed in the early part of the year,
there was little hard evidence to indicate that it would decline any
further over the forecast horizon or that there had been a significant
increase in the sustainable growth rate of the economy. A few members
also expressed concern about the possible repercussions in financial
markets of an easing action that would follow an already strong rally
in bond and stock prices. In the circumstances, these members
questioned whether a somewhat easier policy stance would prove
consistent with the Committee's objective of fostering further
progress toward price stability. Moreover, although the available
evidence on the economy's current performance remained mixed, the
moderation in economic growth after the third-quarter surge did not
seem at this time to signal a growing shortfall of the economy from
its potential. Instead, the economy was likely in this view to
continue to grow at a generally acceptable rate at or near capacity,
and a few members saw some potential for somewhat faster growth at a
pace that over time could intensify inflationary pressures.
Accordingly, they preferred to wait for further evidence on inflation
trends and the performance of the economy, but they indicated that in
light of the uncertainties that were involved and the small amount of
easing that was proposed they would not dissent from the majority
position.
With regard to possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, all the members endorsed a proposal to retain an
intermeeting instruction in the directive that did not incorporate any
presumption about the direction of a possible intermeeting change.
While such a change in policy could not be ruled out, the potential
need for a further intermeeting policy adjustment appeared remote at
this juncture. The risks to the outlook seemed generally in balance,
and the direction of the next policy move was not clear in the view of
some members.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they favored or could support a directive that
called for some slight easing in the degree of pressure on reserve
conditions during the intermeeting period but that contained no
presumption about the likely direction of any intermeeting policy
change. Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, the Committee decided that slightly greater or slightly
lesser monetary restraint would be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. A staff analysis indicated that the reserve conditions
contemplated at this meeting would be consistent with moderate growth
of M2 and M3 over coming months.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until instructed otherwise by the Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following
domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
a substantial slowing in the expansion of economic
activity after a strong gain in the third quarter.
Nonfarm payroll employment increased further in
November, but the civilian unemployment rate edged up
to 5.6 percent. Industrial production was little
changed on average over October and November after a
moderate rise in the third quarter. Total nominal
retail sales rose somewhat on balance over October and
November. Housing starts were down in October after a
large increase in the third quarter. However, orders
for nondefense capital goods point to substantial
expansion of spending on business equipment in the near
term, and nonresidential construction has risen
appreciably further. Wage trends have been stable and
consumer prices have risen relatively slowly on average
in recent months.
Most market interest rates have declined slightly
since the Committee meeting on November 15. In foreign
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies has risen
slightly on balance over the intermeeting period.
The substantial moderation in the growth of M2 and
M3 since midsummer continued in November; however, for
the year through November, M2 expanded at a rate in the
upper half of its range for 1995 and M3 grew at a rate
at the upper end of its range. Growth in total
domestic nonfinancial debt has slowed somewhat in
recent months but for the year to date remains around
the midpoint of its monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July reaffirmed the range it had established
on January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5
percent, measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
the fourth quarter of 1995. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 3 to 7 percent for the
year that it had set for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt. The Committee raised the 1995 range
for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
1996, the Committee established on a tentative basis
the same ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated
in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Blinder, Hoenig, Kelley, Lindsey,
Melzer, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Moskow, Mses. Phillips
and Yellen.
Votes against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, January 30-31, 1996.
The meeting adjourned at 1:05 p.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Return to top
FOMC
Home | Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us
Last update: May 4, 2007