FRB: FOMC Minutes - February 4-5, 1997
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting of February 4-5, 1997
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 4, 1997 at 2:30 p.m. and
continued on Wednesday, February 5, 1997 at 9:00 a.m.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Meyer
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Messrs. Hoenig, Jordan, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 1
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Hunter,
Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, Slifman,
and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors,
Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, 2Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Brady 2 and Reifschneider, 2 Section
Chiefs,  Divisions of Monetary Affairs and
Research and Statistics respectively, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Brayton 2 and Rosine, 2 Senior
Economists, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Garrett, Economist, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Dewald, Hakkio, Lang,
Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas,
and Cleveland respectively
Mr. Miller and Ms. Perelmuter, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and
New York respectively
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices
of the election of the following members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the period commencing January 1,
1997, and ending December 31, 1997, had been received and that the
named individuals had executed their oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
William J. McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with Ernest T. Patrikis, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate;
J. Alfred Broaddus, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, with Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, as alternate;
Michael H. Moskow, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
with Jerry L. Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, as alternate;
Jack Guynn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with
Thomas C. Melzer, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, as alternate;
Robert T. Parry, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, with Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31,
1997, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance
of their official connection with the Board of Governors or with a
Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official connection
with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Alan Greenspan,                   	Chairman
William J. McDonough,	Vice Chairman
Donald L. Kohn,	Secretary and Economist
Normand R. V. Bernard,	Deputy Secretary
Joseph R. Coyne,	Assistant Secretary
Gary P. Gillum,	Assistant Secretary
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr.,	General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., 	Deputy General Counsel
Michael J. Prell,	Economist
Edwin M. Truman,	Economist
Jack H. Beebe, Robert A. Eisenbeis,
Marvin S. Goodfriend, William C. Hunter,
David E. Lindsey, Frederic S. Mishkin,
Larry J. Promisel, Charles J. Siegman,
Lawrence Slifman, and David J. Stockton, 	Associate Economists
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of the Committee after
December 31, 1997.
By unanimous vote, Peter R. Fisher was selected to serve at
the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, System Open Market Account,
on the understanding that his selection was subject to being
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Secretary's note:  Advice subsequently was received
that the selection of Mr. Fisher as Manager was
satisfactory to the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open
Market Operations shown below was reaffirmed.
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the extent necessary to carry out
the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including
securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and securities that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States in the open market, from
or to securities dealers and foreign and international accounts
maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash,
regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market
Account at market prices, and, for such Account, to exchange maturing
U.S. Government and Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the
individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
provided that the aggregate amount of U.S. Government and Federal
agency securities held in such Account (including forward commitments)
at the close of business on the day of a meeting of the Committee at
which action is taken with respect to a domestic policy directive
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $8.0 billion during
the period commencing with the opening of business on the day
following such meeting and ending with the close of business on the
day of the next such meeting;
(b) When appropriate, to buy or sell in the open market, from or
to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery
basis, for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at
market discount rates, prime bankers acceptances with maturities of up
to nine months at the time of acceptance that (1) arise out of the
current shipment of goods between countries or within the United
States, or (2) arise out of the storage within the United States of
goods under contract of sale or expected to move into the channels of
trade within a reasonable time and that are secured throughout their
life by a warehouse receipt or similar document conveying title to the
underlying goods; provided that the aggregate amount of bankers
acceptances held at any one time shall not exceed $100 million;
(c) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations that are
direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by, any agency of the United States, and prime bankers
acceptances of the types authorized for purchase under l(b) above,
from dealers for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
under agreements for repurchase of such securities, obligations, or
acceptances in 15 calendar days or less, at rates that, unless
otherwise expressly authorized by the Committee, shall be determined
by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the
volume of agreements with individual dealers; provided that in the
event Government securities or agency issues covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agreement
or a renewal thereof, they shall be sold in the market or transferred
to the System Open Market Account; and provided further that in the
event bankers acceptances covered by any such agreement are not
repurchased by the seller, they shall continue to be held by the
Federal Reserve Bank or shall be sold in the open market.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs
the Federal Reserve Banks to lend U.S. Government securities held in
the System Open Market Account to Government securities dealers and to
banks participating in Government securities clearing arrangements
conducted through a Federal Reserve Bank, under such instructions as
the Committee may specify from time to time.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market
operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments
for foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for System Open
Market Account, to sell U.S. Government securities to such foreign and
international accounts on the bases set forth in paragraph l(a) under
agreements providing for the resale by such accounts of those
securities within 15 calendar days on terms comparable to those
available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for New York
Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to
the conditions imposed on purchases and sales of securities in
paragraph l(c), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase
agreements between its own account and foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Bank.  Transactions undertaken with such
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may provide for a
service fee when appropriate.
With Mr. Broaddus dissenting, the Authorization for Foreign
Currency Operations shown below was reaffirmed.
Return to top
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes and directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for System Open Market Account, to
the extent necessary to carry out the Committee's foreign currency
directive and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions as the
Committee may issue from time to time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the
form of cable transfers through spot or forward transactions on the
open market at home and abroad, including transactions with the U.S.
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established by
Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with foreign monetary
authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with
other international financial institutions:
Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Netherlands guilders
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs
B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts
to receive or to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in paragraph A
above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign banks to draw
dollars under the reciprocal currency arrangements listed in paragraph
2 below, provided that drawings by either party to any such
arrangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the Committee,
because of exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies
not exceeding $25.0 billion.  For this purpose, the overall open
position in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding
signs) of net positions in individual currencies.  The net position in
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt, minus
outstanding contracts for future delivery of that currency, i.e., as
the sum of these elements with due regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap"
arrangements) for the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign banks, which are among
those designated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the Committee to renew
such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank     Amount of arrangement   (millions of dollars equivalent)
Austrian National Bank    250
National Bank of Belgium    1,000
Bank of Canada   2,000
National Bank of Denmark   250
Bank of England  3,000
Bank of France  2,000
German Federal Bank 6,000
Bank of Italy   3,000
Bank of Japan   5,000
Bank of Mexico   3,000
Netherlands Bank 500
Bank of Norway     250
Bank of Sweden    300
Swiss National Bank   4,000
Bank for International Settlements:
Dollars against Swiss francs   600
Dollars against authorized European  currencies other than Swiss francs   1,250
Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the
proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall
be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph
1.A. above shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, be at prevailing market rates.  For the purpose of
providing an investment return on System holdings of foreign
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or
received in connection with swap drawings, transactions with foreign
central banks may be undertaken at non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions.  In
making operating arrangements with foreign central banks on System
holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.  Any agreements or
understandings concerning the administration of the accounts
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign
banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section 214.5 of
Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the
Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to ensure that
adequate liquidity is maintained to meet anticipated needs and so that
each currency portfolio shall generally have an average duration of no
more than 18 months (calculated as Macaulay duration).  When
appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide investment
facilities for foreign currency holdings, U.S. Government securities
may be purchased from foreign central banks under agreements for
repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs
shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and
the Committee.  The Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the Vice Chairman of the
Board of Governors, and such other member of the Board as the Chairman
may designate (or in the absence of members of the Board serving on
the Subcommittee, other Board members designated by the Chairman as
alternates, and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee,
his alternate).  Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be called at the
request of any member, or at the request of the Manager, System Open
Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or
contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other
matters relating to his responsibilities.  At the request of any
member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and
consultations shall be referred for determination to the Federal Open
Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter into any needed
agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury about
the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between
the System and the U.S. Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning
System foreign currency operations, and to consult with the Secretary
on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and
information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary
and Financial Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to transmit
pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to
appropriate officials of the U.S. Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign
currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3
G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to
Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.
With Mr. Broaddus dissenting, the Foreign Currency Directive
shown below was reaffirmed.
Return to top
Foreign Currency Directive
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be
directed at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that
market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar reflect actions and
behavior consistent with the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales of foreign
exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with
selected foreign central banks and with the Bank for International
Settlements.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks of other
countries and with international monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable future needs
for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and U.S. Treasury
commitments in particular currencies, and to facilitate operations of
the Exchange Stabilization Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly authorized by the
Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the
U.S. Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary
authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of the United
States in the International Monetary Fund regarding exchange
arrangements under the IMF Article IV.
Mr. Broaddus dissented in the votes on the Authorization and
the Directive because they provide the foundation for foreign exchange
market intervention.  He believed that the Federal Reserve's
participation in foreign exchange market intervention compromises its
ability to conduct monetary policy effectively.  Because sterilized
intervention cannot have sustained effects in the absence of
conforming monetary policy actions, Federal Reserve participation in
foreign exchange operations in his view risks one of two undesirable
outcomes.  First, the independence of monetary policy is jeopardized
if the System adjusts its policy actions to support short-term foreign
exchange objectives set by the Treasury.  Alternatively, the
credibility of monetary policy is damaged if the System does not
follow interventions with compatible policy actions, the interventions
consequently fail to achieve their objectives, and the System is
associated in the mind of the public with the failed operations.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with Respect
to Foreign Currency Operations shown below were reaffirmed.
Return to top
Procedural Instructions with Respect to
Foreign Currency Operations
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization and
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee as set forth in the
Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and the Foreign Currency
Directive, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager,
System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall be guided by the
following procedural understandings with respect to consultations and
clearances with the Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and
the Chairman of the Committee.  All operations undertaken pursuant to
such clearances shall be reported promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million on
any day or $600 million since the most recent regular meeting of the
Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on any day in the
System's net position in a single foreign currency exceeding $150
million, or $300 million when the operation is associated with
repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial volume of
trading in a particular currency by the System, even though the change
in the System's net position in that currency might be less than the
limits specified in 1.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank not exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or with the
Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the
full Committee is not feasible in the time available, or with the
Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in the System's
overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion
since the most recent regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank exceeding the
larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap
arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the
Chairman about proposed swap drawings by the System and about any
operations that are not of a routine character.
By unanimous vote, the Committee reduced from $20 billion to
$5 billion the amount of eligible foreign currencies that the System
was prepared to "warehouse" for the U.S. Treasury and the Exchange
Stabilization Fund (ESF).  Warehousing involves spot purchases of
foreign currencies from the U.S. Treasury or the ESF and simultaneous
forward sales of the same currencies to the U.S. Treasury or the ESF
at the then-current forward market rates.  The effect of warehousing
is to supplement the U.S. dollar resources of the U.S. Treasury and
the ESF for financing the purchase of foreign currencies and related
international operations.  The agreement had been enlarged from $5
billion to $20 billion in early 1995 to facilitate United States
participation in the Multilateral Program to Restore Financial
Stability in Mexico.  No use of the warehousing facility had been made
by the U.S. Treasury or the ESF during this period, and in light of
Mexico's repayment to the U.S. Treasury of all the financing provided
under the Program and the termination of that Program, the Committee
agreed that the size of the warehousing arrangement should revert to
$5 billion.
The Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,
conducted by the Board's Division of Reserve Bank Operations and
Payment Systems as of the close of business on October 31, 1996, was
accepted.
By unanimous vote, the Program for Security of FOMC
Information was amended to update the document with regard to certain
security classifications, access to FOMC information, and attendance
at FOMC meetings.
On January 23, 1997, the continuing rules and other standing
instructions of the Committee had been distributed with the advice
that, in accordance with procedures approved by the Committee, they
were being called to the Committee's attention before the February 4-5
organization meeting to give members an opportunity to raise any
questions they might have concerning them.  Members were asked to
indicate if they wished to have any of the documents in question
placed on the agenda for consideration at this meeting, and no
requests for consideration were received.
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on December 17, 1996, were approved.  The
Committee also discussed its long-standing practice of releasing the
minutes a few days after the meeting at which they were approved,
usually on the following Friday.  The members agreed with a proposal
to advance the normal release to Thursday to facilitate the
dissemination and public understanding of these decisions.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets since the meeting on December
17, 1996.  There were no transactions in foreign currencies for System
account during this period, and thus no vote was required of the
Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period December
18, 1996, through February 4, 1997.  By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
The Manager advised the Committee that the anticipated
pattern of reserve needs was such that he might want to add considerably to the System's outright holdings of U.S. government securities
over the coming intermeeting period.  By unanimous vote, the Committee
amended paragraph 1(a) of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market
Operations to raise the limit on intermeeting changes in such holdings
from $8 billion to $12 billion for the period ending with the close of
business on the date of the next meeting, March 25, 1997.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in
1997, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting
period ahead.  A summary of the economic and financial information
available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion
is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was
approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
growth of the economy had strengthened markedly in the fourth quarter
of 1996.  To a large extent the gain in final demand during the
quarter reflected a surge in exports, but consumer spending also
increased substantially after having risen at a much reduced pace in
the third quarter.  Despite some slowing in the growth of business
fixed investment and some easing in housing activity, the overall
economy had expanded briskly as reflected in data on production and
employment.  The tightness in labor markets had persisted and was
evidenced by some continued acceleration in labor compensation in the
fourth quarter.  There was no discernible change in the underlying
trend in price inflation, although a spurt in energy prices had
resulted in faster increases in overall consumer and producer prices
than in the third quarter.
Private payroll employment rose appreciably further in
December after recording sizable increases over October and November.
The gains remained widespread among employment categories and
continued to be led by large advances in the services and trade
industries.  Aggregate hours of private production workers and the
average workweek edged higher in the fourth quarter.  The civilian
unemployment rate was unchanged in December at 5.3 percent, its
average level for the second half of the year.
Return to top
Industrial production increased sharply in November and
December.  The gains in December were widely distributed across
manufacturing industries, but were held down by a steep decline in the
output of utilities after a surge in November.  The production of
aircraft and parts extended a strong uptrend.  The utilization of
total manufacturing capacity rose considerably further in December, to
a level slightly above its long-term average.
Consumer spending registered a sizable increase over the
fourth quarter after having grown little during the summer.  In
December total nominal retail sales rose considerably following a
small decline in November.  The December increases were spread across
all major categories except for some further decline in sales of
building materials and supplies.  The most recent data on services
expenditures pointed to moderate advances in October and November.
Surveys indicated that consumer confidence had remained elevated in
late 1996 and early 1997.
Housing starts fell appreciably in December, evidently
reflecting unusually adverse weather conditions in several parts of
the country, and were down somewhat for the fourth quarter as a whole.
The declines were concentrated in single-family units.  Permits for
new home construction were little changed in December but edged lower
for the fourth quarter as a whole.  Available data indicated a somewhat slower pace of sales of new and existing homes in the fourth
quarter.
Growth of business fixed investment moderated considerably in
the fourth quarter after advancing sharply in the previous quarter.
The slowdown reflected a small decline in spending on producer durable
equipment that was more than offset by an apparent surge in outlays
for nonresidential structures.  Growth in spending on office,
computing, and communications equipment slowed somewhat from the
third-quarter pace but remained on a steep uptrend.  Business
investment in transportation equipment was weak in the fourth quarter,
as sales of heavy trucks fell further and work stoppages at a major
manufacturer prompted cuts in fleet auto sales in October and
November.
Business inventory investment picked up somewhat on average
in October and November, with most of the increase occurring in
manufacturing.  Trade inventories increased moderately on balance over
the two-month period.  Reflecting considerable strength in shipments
and sales, however, inventory-sales ratios for most industries and
trade groupings edged lower from their third-quarter levels.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
narrowed considerably in October and November from its rate in the
third quarter.  Nearly all the improvement was accounted for by a very
large increase in exports of goods and services.  The rise was spread
among all major trade categories except for automotive products.
Economic activity in the major foreign industrial countries appeared
to have continued to expand at a moderate rate on average in the
fourth quarter.  Available indicators suggested relatively strong
economic performances in Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom and
slower growth in the major continental European countries.  Further
expansion was reported for several large Latin American and some Asian
economies.
Recent data pointed to little change in underlying inflation
trends.  Overall consumer prices had continued under upward pressure
in November and December, boosted by large advances in energy prices.
Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices rose modestly over
the two months and increased less over the twelve months ending in
December than over the previous twelve months.   At the producer
level, a similar pattern prevailed in prices of finished goods, and
there was no evidence of increased price pressures at earlier stages
of production.  Worker compensation as measured by the employment cost
index (ECI) and average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers rose considerably further during the closing months of
1996.  For the year, both measures were up appreciably more than in
1995, though much of the acceleration in the ECI occurred in the first
half of the year.
At its meeting on December 17, 1996, the Committee issued a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions.  The directive included a bias toward the
possible firming of reserve conditions to reflect a consensus among
the members that the risks remained biased toward higher inflation and
that the next policy move was more likely to be toward some tightening
than toward easing.  In this regard, the directive stated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater
reserve restraint would be acceptable and slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting period.  The
reserve conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with some slowing of the growth of M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period
continued to be directed toward maintaining the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions.  The federal funds rate rose briefly in
response to year-end pressures, but it otherwise tended to remain
close to the 5-1/4 percent level expected with an unchanged policy
stance.  Other short-term interest rates generally were unchanged to
slightly higher over the intermeeting period.  Rates on intermediate-
and long-term securities edged higher on balance in reaction to
incoming data on economic activity that were on the firm side of
market expectations; the increases in such rates appeared to be
tempered, however, by favorable market reactions to new data on wages
and prices.  The generally positive news on economic growth and
inflation along with favorable reports on earnings appeared to
reinforce the optimism of equity market investors, and major indexes
of stock prices increased markedly further over the intermeeting
period.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies rose substantially over
the intermeeting period.  The rise, which was most pronounced against
the Japanese yen and continental European currencies, appeared to
reflect market perceptions of unexpectedly strong economic growth in
the United States and a risk of faltering growth in the other
countries.  The dollar appreciated less against sterling and declined
somewhat against the Canadian dollar in apparent response to
expectations of relative strength in the economies of those countries.
After growing at a considerably faster rate in the fourth
quarter, M2 and M3 apparently increased at a more moderate but still
brisk pace in January.  The expansion of both aggregates likely was
boosted by strong income growth, and the relatively rapid expansion of
M3 reflected heavy bank reliance on the managed liabilities in M3 to
fund robust loan growth.  From the fourth quarter of 1995 to the
fourth quarter of 1996, M2 was estimated to have grown at a rate near
the upper end of the Committee's annual range and M3 at a rate
appreciably above the top of its range.  Total domestic nonfinancial
debt had expanded moderately on balance over recent months and was
estimated to have grown last year at a rate near the midpoint of its
range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the expansion would be sustained at a rate a bit above the economy's
estimated growth potential.  The increase in consumer spending was
projected to moderate somewhat from its pace in the fourth quarter to
a rate generally in line with the expected rise in disposable income.
Homebuilding was forecast to decline somewhat but to stabilize at a
relatively high level in the context of continued income growth and
the generally favorable cash-flow affordability of home ownership.
Business spending on equipment and structures was projected to expand
less rapidly in light of some anticipated slowing in the growth of
sales and profits.  Fiscal policy and the external sector were
expected to exert small restraining influences on economic activity
over the year ahead.  With resource utilization high and rising,
consumer price inflation, as measured by the CPI excluding the
relatively volatile food and energy components of the index, was
forecast to increase slightly this year in the context of some further
pickup in the growth of labor compensation that would include another
legislated rise in the federal minimum wage.
Return to top
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the robust performance
of the economy in the fourth quarter partly reflected some sources of
strength, notably a surge in exports, that were evidently temporary,
and they anticipated substantial moderation in the pace of the
expansion over the period ahead.  The outlook was subject to considerable uncertainty, but as they assessed the numerous factors bearing on
prospective developments, the members generally concluded as they had
at previous meetings that further growth in aggregate demand at a rate
averaging near or a bit above the economy's potential remained a
reasonable expectation.  Many observed, however, that the risks to
such an outlook appeared to be tilted to the upside.  The strength of
the expansion in the fourth quarter, and in fact over 1996 as a whole,
had heightened concerns that the economy had considerable forward
momentum at a time when it was already operating at a level, especially with regard to labor resources, that could tend to generate
rising inflationary pressures.  Indeed, in the view of at least some
members, growth of aggregate demand in line with increases in
potential output posed a risk of rising price inflation because the
recent relatively favorable price performance was seen in this view as
reflecting at least in part the behavior of special factors that could
dissipate over the projection horizon.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for the growth of money and debt
aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had provided individual
projections of the growth in real and nominal GDP, the rate of
unemployment, and the rate of inflation for the year 1997.  The
forecasts of the rate of expansion in real GDP had a central tendency
of 2 to 2-1/4 percent and a full range of 2 to 2-1/2 percent.  The
projections of the civilian unemployment rate associated with these
growth expectations were all in a range of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent for
the fourth quarter of the year.  With regard to nominal GDP growth in
1997, the forecasts were mainly in a range of 4-1/4 to 4-3/4 percent,
with an overall range of 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 percent.  Nearly all the
members anticipated a small decline in the rate of inflation in 1997,
as measured by the consumer price index, from that recorded in 1996.
Specifically, the projections converged on rates of 2-3/4 to 3 percent
and a full range of 2-3/4 to 3-1/2 percent in 1997.  These forecasts
took account of expected developments in the food and energy sectors
and further technical improvements in the index by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, both of which were expected to trim the reported rate.
The projections were based on individual views concerning what would
be an appropriate policy over the projection horizon to further
progress toward the Committee's goals.
In their review of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members observed that the available data and anecdotal
information indicated considerable strength in consumer spending in
recent months, and they referred to a number of underlying factors
that should help to sustain at least moderate further growth in such
spending.  The latter included the solid expansion in employment and
incomes, the increased financial wealth of many consumers, and the
high level of consumer confidence as indicated by recent surveys.
However, members also cited some factors that would tend to restrain
the growth in consumer spending.  Among these factors were the effects
of the high level of consumer debt and rising repayment problems on
both the willingness of households to borrow and of financial
intermediaries to lend, the likely absence of pent-up demands after an
extended period of expansion, and the possibility of a setback in the
stock market.  It was difficult to evaluate how these differing
factors would on balance affect consumer spending, but the members
concluded that the consumer sector was likely to provide important
support for sustained economic expansion.
The growth in business capital spending was expected to
moderate somewhat in 1997 in association with slower growth in sales,
profits, and cash flows.  It also seemed likely after several years of
robust investment expenditures that many business firms now had high
levels of up-to-date capital stock relative to planned production.
Members referred, however, to a number of favorable factors that
should continue to support at least moderate further growth in
business investment, including the attractive pricing of and ongoing
rapid technological improvements in computer and communications
equipment and the wide availability of equity and debt financing on
favorable terms to business firms.  Members also reported that
commercial building activity had improved in many areas.  Some noted a
tendency to underestimate the strength of overall business investment
in recent years, including the stimulus provided by efforts to improve
productivity in highly competitive markets.
While indicators of housing activity had been somewhat
erratic over the past several months, members sensed a somewhat softer
tone on balance in this sector of the economy.  This assessment was
supported by anecdotal observations in several regions across the
country.  Against the background of the increase that had occurred
earlier in mortgage financing costs and forecasts of some slowing in
the growth of jobs and incomes, the housing sector was likely to
weaken slightly over the coming year, but some members commented that
surprises on the upside of current forecasts, as in 1996, could not be
ruled out.
Fiscal policy and foreign trade also were seen as likely to
exert some modest restraint on overall economic activity.  Federal
purchases of goods and services still appeared to be on a declining
trend.  Although fiscal policy negotiations were likely to be
difficult and their outcome was uncertain, members felt that there was
some basis for anticipating the enactment of further legislation this
year to help bring the federal budget into eventual balance.    The
large increase in exports in the fourth quarter clearly was associated
with temporary developments, and net exports were expected to weaken
this year, reflecting both some reversal of recent developments and
the earlier appreciation of the dollar.  Some members reported that
business contacts had already communicated concerns about increased
competitive pressures from imports because of the rise in the foreign
exchange value of the dollar.
Members commented that inflation had remained remarkably
subdued, but they expressed considerable concern about the risks of
rising inflation in the context of high levels of resource use.  They
referred in particular to statistical indications, supported by
anecdotal reports from around the nation, of very tight conditions in
labor markets and some upward pressures on wages.  Thus far, the rise
in compensation had been held down by diminishing increases in worker
benefit costs, and productivity gains also appeared to have had a
favorable effect on unit labor costs.  In addition, the increases in
wages themselves had continued to be restrained by apparent worker
concerns about job security.  To date, there was no evidence that
pressures stemming from tight labor markets had been passed through to
a measurable extent to higher prices.
While the absence of increasing price inflation was a welcome
development, members were concerned that the break with historical
patterns might not persist.  If labor markets remained under pressure,
nominal compensation costs were likely to pick up at some point as
one-time savings in worker benefit costs ran out and as workers became
less willing to trade off lower wages for increased security; such a
development would foster increases in labor costs that ultimately
would feed through to higher prices.  The members did not anticipate a
sudden surge in inflation, but many expressed concern about the
possibility of a gradual upcreep in coming quarters that might become
more considerable later.  They generally expected a small decline in
overall price inflation this year, reflecting favorable developments
in food and energy and, for the CPI, further technical improvements by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics; however, they believed that the risks
to their forecasts were in the direction of greater inflation and
several noted in particular that projected declines in energy prices
might not materialize as soon or to the extent assumed in many
forecasts.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and debt aggregates in
1997 that it had established on a tentative basis at its meeting in
July 1996.  Those ranges included expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2
and 2 to 6 percent for M3, measured from the fourth quarter of 1996 to
the fourth quarter of 1997.  The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 3 to 7 percent for
1997.  The tentative ranges for 1997 were unchanged from the actual
ranges adopted for 1995 (in July of that year for M3) and 1996.
In reviewing the tentative ranges, the members took note of a
staff projection indicating that M2 and M3 likely would grow in 1997
at rates close to the upper limit of those ranges, given the
Committee's expectations for the performance of the economy and prices
and assuming no major changes in interest rates.  The staff analysis
anticipated that the velocities of the broad monetary aggregates would
continue to behave in the relatively stable and predictable manner
that had re-emerged in the last few years and that was closer to
historical norms than had been the case in the early 1990s.
The greater measure of predictability in velocity recently
was an encouraging development, but in view of the substantial changes
in financial markets and the increased availability of investment
alternatives it would be premature to assume that the pattern would
necessarily continue going forward.  Given the substantial uncertainty
still attached to projections of money growth consistent with the
Committee's basic objectives for monetary policy, the members agreed
that there was no firm basis for changing the tentative ranges set in
July 1996.  Adopting higher ranges, which would be more closely
centered on money growth thought likely to be consistent with the
Committee's expectations for economic activity and prices, could be
misinterpreted as indicating that the Committee had become much more
confident of the predictability of velocity and was placing greater
emphasis on M2 and M3 as gauges of the thrust of monetary policy.  One
member, while agreeing with this assessment, emphasized that a
continuation of a stable and predictable pattern of velocity behavior
would raise the question as to whether the Committee should return to
setting ranges consistent with its expectations for economic
developments.  Nonetheless, from a longer-run perspective, the
tentative ranges readily encompass rates of growth of M2 and M3 that,
if velocity were to behave in line with historical experience, could
be expected to be associated with approximate price stability and a
sustainable rate of real economic growth.  In that regard, they
continue to serve the useful purpose of benchmarking money growth
consistent with the Committee's long-run goal of price stability.
Return to top
At the conclusion of its discussion, the Committee voted to
approve without change the tentative ranges for 1997 that it had
established in July of last year.  In keeping with its usual
procedures under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the Committee would review
its ranges at midyear, or sooner if interim conditions warranted, in
light of the growth and velocity behavior of the aggregates and
ongoing economic and financial developments.  Accordingly, the
following statement of longer-run policy for 1997 was approved for
inclusion in the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.  In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997.  The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic non-
financial debt was set at 3 to 7 percent for the year.
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to
be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
Votes for this action:  Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Broaddus, Guynn, Kelley, Meyer, Moskow,
Parry, Mses. Phillips and Rivlin.
Votes against this action:  None.
Absent and not voting:  Mr. Lindsey and Ms.
Yellen.
In the Committee's discussion of policy for the intermeeting
period ahead, all the members favored or could support a proposal to
maintain an unchanged policy stance; the members also strongly
supported the retention of a bias toward restraint.  An unchanged
policy seemed appropriate with inflation still quiescent, with few
signs of emerging price pressures, with growth in economic activity
seen as likely to moderate appreciably from the unexpectedly strong
and unsustainable pace of the fourth quarter, and with considerable
uncertainty about future inflationary developments.  However, the
members emphasized that the extent of the slowdown in economic
expansion was unclear and that the persisting, or even greater,
tightness of labor markets, coupled with potentially faster growth in
worker benefits and diminishing worker insecurity, could put added
upward pressure on labor costs and induce some increase in price
inflation over time.  Even so, most members thought that inflation
likely would remain contained for some period ahead and that any
strengthening in inflation pressures probably would be gradual,
allowing the Committee to respond in a timely manner.  Several also
commented that a tightening policy action was not generally
anticipated in financial markets, and a move at this time could have
exaggerated repercussions.  A few members emphasized, however, that
the recent surge in economic activity had raised the probability that
the level of economic output was now above the economy's long-run
potential, and without a significant slowing in economic growth,
inflationary pressures were more likely to increase over the forecast
horizon.  While an immediate tightening of policy would help to
forestall such a buildup of pressures, the members agreed that current
uncertainties about the outlook for both the rate of expansion and
inflation warranted a continuing "wait and see" policy stance, or at
least made such a policy acceptable at this juncture.
In their discussion of possible adjustments to policy during
the intermeeting period, the members recognized that an asymmetric
directive tilted toward tightening was consistent with their general
view that the risks were now more clearly in the direction of an
upward trend in inflation.  They agreed that the current environment
called for careful monitoring of new developments and for prompt
action by the Committee to counter any tendency for price inflation to
rise and for higher inflation expectations to become embedded in
financial markets and economic decision-making more generally.
Indeed, in the interest of fostering a continuation of sustainable
growth of the economy, it would be desirable to tighten before any
sign of actual higher inflation were to become evident.
Return to top
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they supported a directive that called for
maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions and
that retained a bias toward the possible firming of reserve conditions
during the intermeeting period.  Accordingly, in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that
somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable and slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting
period.  The reserve conditions contemplated at this meeting were
expected to be consistent with some moderation in the expansion of M2
and M3 over coming months.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until instructed otherwise by the Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following
domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the economic expansion strengthened markedly in the
fourth quarter.  Private nonfarm payroll employment
increased appreciably further in December after sizable
gains over October and November.  The civilian unemployment rate remained at 5.3 percent in December.  Industrial production rose sharply in November and December.
Consumer spending posted a large increase in the fourth
quarter after a summer lull.  Housing activity moderated
somewhat over the closing months of the year.  Growth in
business fixed investment slowed substantially in the
fourth quarter after a sharp rise in the third quarter.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
narrowed considerably in October and November from its
rate in the third quarter.  Advances in labor compensation trended up in 1996, but price inflation generally
diminished apart from enlarged increases in food and
energy prices.
Most market interest rates have changed little or
risen slightly since the Committee meeting on December
17, 1996.  In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies has increased substantially over the
intermeeting period.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened considerably in the
fourth quarter and appeared to have continued at a fairly
brisk, though diminished, pace in January.  From the
fourth quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996, M2
is estimated to have grown near the upper end of the
Committee's annual range and M3 well above the top of its
range.  Total domestic nonfinancial debt has expanded
moderately on balance over recent months and is estimated
to have grown last year near the midpoint of its range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.  In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997.  The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 3 to 7 percent for the year.
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to
be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions.  In the context
of the Committee's long-run objectives for price
stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve restraint
would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period.  The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
some moderation in the expansion of M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Votes for this action:  Messrs. Greenspan,
McDonough, Broaddus, Guynn, Kelley, Meyer, Moskow,
Parry, Mses. Phillips and Rivlin.
Votes against this action:  None.
Absent and not voting:  Mr. Lindsey and Ms.
Yellen.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, March 25, 1997.
The meeting adjourned at 11:35 a.m.
Donald L. Kohn
Secretary
Footnotes
1Attended Tuesday session only.
2Attended portions of meeting relating to the Committee's review of
the economic outlook and establishment of its monetary and debt
ranges for 1997.
Return to top
Home | FOMC
Accessibility
To comment on this site, please fill out our
feedback form.
Last update: March 27, 1997 2:00 PM